The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Magic of Oz, by L. Frank Baum

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Magic of Oz

Author: L. Frank Baum

Posting Date: July 20, 2008 [EBook #419]
Release Date: February, 1996

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAGIC OF OZ ***




Produced by Dennis Amundson.









The Magic of Oz



  A Faithful Record of the Remarkable Adventures of Dorothy
      and Trot and the Wizard of Oz, together with the
       Cowardly Lion, the Hungry Tiger and Cap'n Bill,
           in their successful search for a Magical
              and Beautiful Birthday Present for
                     Princess Ozma of Oz



by

L. Frank Baum

"Royal Historian of Oz"



Contents

   --To My Readers--
   1.  Mount Munch
   2.  The Hawk
   3.  Two Bad Ones
   4.  Conspirators
   5.  A Happy Corner of Oz
   6.  Ozma's Birthday Presents
   7.  The Forest of Gugu
   8.  The Li-Mon-Eags Make Trouble
   9.  The Isle of the Magic Flower
  10.  Stuck Fast
  11.  The Beasts of the Forest of Gugu
  12.  Kiki Uses His Magic
  13.  The Loss of the Black Bag
  14.  The Wizard Learns the Magic Word
  15.  The Lonesome Duck
  16.  The Glass Cat Finds the Black Bag
  17.  A Remarkable Journey
  18.  The Magic of the Wizard
  19.  Dorothy and the Bumble Bees
  20.  The Monkeys Have Trouble
  21.  The College of Athletic Arts
  22.  Ozma's Birthday Party
  23.  The Fountain of Oblivion




To My Readers


Curiously enough, in the events which have taken place in the last few
years in our "great outside world," we may find incidents so marvelous
and inspiring that I cannot hope to equal them with stories of The Land
of Oz.

However, "The Magic of Oz" is really more strange and unusual than
anything I have read or heard about on our side of The Great Sandy
Desert which shuts us off from The Land of Oz, even during the past
exciting years, so I hope it will appeal to your love of novelty.

A long and confining illness has prevented my answering all the good
letters sent me--unless stamps were enclosed--but from now on I hope to
be able to give prompt attention to each and every letter with which my
readers favor me.

Assuring you that my love for you has never faltered and hoping the Oz
Books will continue to give you pleasure as long as I am able to write
them, I am

Yours affectionately,

  L. FRANK BAUM,
  "Royal Historian of Oz."
  "OZCOT"
  at HOLLYWOOD
  in CALIFORNIA
  1919




1.  Mount Munch


On the east edge of the Land of Oz, in the Munchkin Country, is a big,
tall hill called Mount Munch.  One one side, the bottom of this hill
just touches the Deadly Sandy Desert that separates the Fairyland of Oz
from all the rest of the world, but on the other side, the hill touches
the beautiful, fertile Country of the Munchkins.

The Munchkin folks, however, merely stand off and look at Mount Munch
and know very little about it; for, about a third of the way up, its
sides become too steep to climb, and if any people live upon the top of
that great towering peak that seems to reach nearly to the skies, the
Munchkins are not aware of the fact.

But people DO live there, just the same.  The top of Mount Munch is
shaped like a saucer, broad and deep, and in the saucer are fields
where grains and vegetables grow, and flocks are fed, and brooks flow
and trees bear all sorts of things.  There are houses scattered here
and there, each having its family of Hyups, as the people call
themselves.  The Hyups seldom go down the mountain, for the same reason
that the Munchkins never climb up: the sides are too steep.

In one of the houses lived a wise old Hyup named Bini Aru, who used to
be a clever Sorcerer.  But Ozma of Oz, who rules everyone in the Land
of Oz, had made a decree that no one should practice magic in her
dominions except Glinda the Good and the Wizard of Oz, and when Glinda
sent this royal command to the Hyups by means of a strong-winged Eagle,
old Bini Aru at once stopped performing magical arts.  He destroyed
many of his magic powders and tools of magic, and afterward honestly
obeyed the law.  He had never seen Ozma, but he knew she was his Ruler
and must be obeyed.

There was only one thing that grieved him.  He had discovered a new and
secret method of transformations that was unknown to any other
Sorcerer.  Glinda the Good did not know it, nor did the little Wizard
of Oz, nor Dr. Pipt nor old Mombi, nor anyone else who dealt in magic
arts.  It was Bini Aru's own secret.  By its means, it was the simplest
thing in the world to transform anyone into beast, bird or fish, or
anything else, and back again, once you know how to pronounce the
mystical word: "Pyrzqxgl."

Bini Aru had used this secret many times, but not to cause evil or
suffering to others.  When he had wandered far from home and was
hungry, he would say: "I want to become a cow--Pyrzqxgl!" In an instant
he would be a cow, and then he would eat grass and satisfy his hunger.
All beasts and birds can talk in the Land of Oz, so when the cow was no
longer hungry, it would say: "I want to be Bini Aru again: Pyrzqxgl!"
and the magic word, properly pronounced, would instantly restore him to
his proper form.

Now, of course, I would not dare to write down this magic word so
plainly if I thought my readers would pronounce it properly and so be
able to transform themselves and others, but it is a fact that no one
in all the world except Bini Aru, had ever (up to the time this story
begins) been able to pronounce "Pyrzqxgl!" the right way, so I think it
is safe to give it to you.  It might be well, however, in reading this
story aloud, to be careful not to pronounce Pyrzqxgl the proper way,
and thus avoid all danger of the secret being able to work mischief.

Bini Aru, having discovered the secret of instant transformation, which
required no tools or powders or other chemicals or herbs and always
worked perfectly, was reluctant to have such a wonderful discovery
entirely unknown or lost to all human knowledge.  He decided not to use
it again, since Ozma had forbidden him to do so, but he reflected that
Ozma was a girl and some time might change her mind and allow her
subjects to practice magic, in which case Bini Aru could again
transform himself and others at will,--unless, of course, he forgot how
to pronounce Pyrzqxgl in the meantime.

After giving the matter careful thought, he decided to write the word,
and how it should be pronounced, in some secret place, so that he could
find it after many years, but where no one else could ever find it.

That was a clever idea, but what bothered the old Sorcerer was to find
a secret place.  He wandered all over the Saucer at the top of Mount
Munch, but found no place in which to write the secret word where
others might not be likely to stumble upon it.  So finally he decided
it must be written somewhere in his own house.

Bini Aru had a wife named Mopsi Aru who was famous for making fine
huckleberry pies, and he had a son named Kiki Aru who was not famous at
all.  He was noted as being cross and disagreeable because he was not
happy, and he was not happy because he wanted to go down the mountain
and visit the big world below and his father would not let him.  No one
paid any attention to Kiki Aru, because he didn't amount to anything,
anyway.

Once a year there was a festival on Mount Munch which all the Hyups
attended.  It was held in the center of the saucer-shaped country, and
the day was given over to feasting and merry-making.  The young folks
danced and sang songs; the women spread the tables with good things to
eat, and the men played on musical instruments and told fairy tales.

Kiki Aru usually went to these festivals with his parents, and then sat
sullenly outside the circle and would not dance or sing or even talk to
the other young people.  So the festival did not make him any happier
than other days, and this time he told Bini Aru and Mopsi Aru that he
would not go.  He would rather stay at home and be unhappy all by
himself, he said, and so they gladly let him stay.

But after he was left alone Kiki decided to enter his father's private
room, where he was forbidden to go, and see if he could find any of the
magic tools Bini Aru used to work with when he practiced sorcery.  As
he went in Kiki stubbed his toe on one of the floor boards.  He
searched everywhere but found no trace of his father's magic.  All had
been destroyed.

Much disappointed, he started to go out again when he stubbed his toe
on the same floor board.  That set him thinking.  Examining the board
more closely, Kiki found it had been pried up and then nailed down
again in such a manner that it was a little higher than the other
boards.  But why had his father taken up the board?  Had he hidden some
of his magic tools underneath the floor?

Kiki got a chisel and pried up the board, but found nothing under it.
He was just about to replace the board when it slipped from his hand
and turned over, and he saw something written on the underside of it.
The light was rather dim, so he took the board to the window and
examined it, and found that the writing described exactly how to
pronounce the magic word Pyrzqxgl, which would transform anyone into
anything instantly, and back again when the word was repeated.

Now, at first, Kiki Aru didn't realize what a wonderful secret he had
discovered; but he thought it might be of use to him and so he took a
piece of paper and made on it an exact copy of the instructions for
pronouncing Pyrzqxgl.  Then he folded the paper and put it in his
pocket, and replaced the board in the floor so that no one would
suspect it had been removed.

After this Kiki went into the garden and sitting beneath a tree made a
careful study of the paper.  He had always wanted to get away from
Mount Munch and visit the big world--especially the Land of Oz--and the
idea now came to him that if he could transform himself into a bird, he
could fly to any place he wished to go and fly back again whenever he
cared to.  It was necessary, however, to learn by heart the way to
pronounce the magic word, because a bird would have no way to carry a
paper with it, and Kiki would be unable to resume his proper shape if
he forgot the word or its pronunciation.

So he studied it a long time, repeating it a hundred times in his mind
until he was sure he would not forget it.  But to make safety doubly
sure he placed the paper in a tin box in a neglected part of the garden
and covered the box with small stones.

By this time it was getting late in the day and Kiki wished to attempt
his first transformation before his parents returned from the festival.
So he stood on the front porch of his home and said:

"I want to become a big, strong bird, like a hawk--Pyrzqxgl!" He
pronounced it the right way, so in a flash he felt that he was
completely changed in form.  He flapped his wings, hopped to the porch
railing and said: "Caw-oo!  Caw-oo!"

Then he laughed and said half aloud: "I suppose that's the funny sound
this sort of a bird makes.  But now let me try my wings and see if I'm
strong enough to fly across the desert."

For he had decided to make his first trip to the country outside the
Land of Oz.  He had stolen this secret of transformation and he knew he
had disobeyed the law of Oz by working magic.  Perhaps Glinda or the
Wizard of Oz would discover him and punish him, so it would be good
policy to keep away from Oz altogether.

Slowly Kiki rose into the air, and resting on his broad wings, floated
in graceful circles above the saucer-shaped mountain-top.  From his
height, he could see, far across the burning sands of the Deadly
Desert, another country that might be pleasant to explore, so he headed
that way, and with strong, steady strokes of his wings, began the long
flight.




2.  The Hawk


Even a hawk has to fly high in order to cross the Deadly Desert, from
which poisonous fumes are constantly rising.  Kiki Aru felt sick and
faint by the time he reached good land again, for he could not quite
escape the effects of the poisons.  But the fresh air soon restored him
and he alighted in a broad table-land which is called Hiland.  Just
beyond it is a valley known as Loland, and these two countries are
ruled by the Gingerbread Man, John Dough, with Chick the Cherub as his
Prime Minister.  The hawk merely stopped here long enough to rest, and
then he flew north and passed over a fine country called Merryland,
which is ruled by a lovely Wax Doll.  Then, following the curve of the
Desert, he turned north and settled on a tree-top in the Kingdom of
Noland.

Kiki was tired by this time, and the sun was now setting, so he decided
to remain here till morning.  From his tree-top he could see a house
near by, which looked very comfortable.  A man was milking a cow in the
yard and a pleasant-faced woman came to the door and called him to
supper.

That made Kiki wonder what sort of food hawks ate.  He felt hungry, but
didn't know what to eat or where to get it.  Also he thought a bed
would be more comfortable than a tree-top for sleeping, so he hopped to
the ground and said: "I want to become Kiki Aru again--Pyrzqxgl!"

Instantly he had resumed his natural shape, and going to the house, he
knocked upon the door and asked for some supper.

"Who are you?" asked the man of the house.

"A stranger from the Land of Oz," replied Kiki Aru.

"Then you are welcome," said the man.

Kiki was given a good supper and a good bed, and he behaved very well,
although he refused to answer all the questions the good people of
Noland asked him.  Having escaped from his home and found a way to see
the world, the young man was no longer unhappy, and so he was no longer
cross and disagreeable.  The people thought him a very respectable
person and gave him breakfast next morning, after which he started on
his way feeling quite contented.

Having walked for an hour or two through the pretty country that is
ruled by King Bud, Kiki Aru decided he could travel faster and see more
as a bird, so he transformed himself into a white dove and visited the
great city of Nole and saw the King's palace and gardens and many other
places of interest.  Then he flew westward into the Kingdom of Ix, and
after a day in Queen Zixi's country went on westward into the Land of
Ev.  Every place he visited he thought was much more pleasant than the
saucer-country of the Hyups, and he decided that when he reached the
finest country of all he would settle there and enjoy his future life
to the utmost.

In the land of Ev he resumed his own shape again, for the cities and
villages were close together and he could easily go on foot from one to
another of them.

Toward evening he came to a good Inn and asked the inn-keeper if he
could have food and lodging.

"You can if you have the money to pay," said the man, "otherwise you
must go elsewhere."

This surprised Kiki, for in the Land of Oz they do not use money at
all, everyone being allowed to take what he wishes without price.  He
had no money, therefore, and so he turned away to seek hospitality
elsewhere.  Looking through an open window into one of the rooms of the
Inn, as he passed along, he saw an old man counting on a table a big
heap of gold pieces, which Kiki thought to be money.  One of these
would buy him supper and a bed, he reflected, so he transformed himself
into a magpie and, flying through the open window, caught up one of the
gold pieces in his beak and flew out again before the old man could
interfere.  Indeed, the old man who was robbed was quite helpless, for
he dared not leave his pile of gold to chase the magpie, and before he
could place the gold in a sack in his pocket the robber bird was out of
sight and to seek it would be folly.

Kiki Aru flew to a group of trees and, dropping the gold piece to the
ground, resumed his proper shape, and then picked up the money and put
it in his pocket.

"You'll be sorry for this!" exclaimed a small voice just over his head.

Kiki looked up and saw that a sparrow, perched upon a branch, was
watching him.

"Sorry for what?" he demanded.

"Oh, I saw the whole thing," asserted the sparrow.  "I saw you look in
the window at the gold, and then make yourself into a magpie and rob
the poor man, and then I saw you fly here and make the bird into your
former shape.  That's magic, and magic is wicked and unlawful; and you
stole money, and that's a still greater crime.  You'll be sorry, some
day."

"I don't care," replied Kiki Aru, scowling.

"Aren't you afraid to be wicked?" asked the sparrow.

"No, I didn't know I was being wicked," said Kiki, "but if I was, I'm
glad of it.  I hate good people.  I've always wanted to be wicked, but
I didn't know how."

"Haw, haw, haw!" laughed someone behind him, in a big voice; "that's
the proper spirit, my lad!  I'm glad I've met you; shake hands."

The sparrow gave a frightened squeak and flew away.




3.  Two Bad Ones


Kiki turned around and saw a queer old man standing near.  He didn't
stand straight, for he was crooked.  He had a fat body and thin legs
and arms.  He had a big, round face with bushy, white whiskers that
came to a point below his waist, and white hair that came to a point on
top of his head.  He wore dull-gray clothes that were tight fitting,
and his pockets were all bunched out as if stuffed full of something.

"I didn't know you were here," said Kiki.

"I didn't come until after you did," said the queer old man.

"Who are you?" asked Kiki.

"My name's Ruggedo.  I used to be the Nome King; but I got kicked out
of my country, and now I'm a wanderer."

"What made them kick you out?" inquired the Hyup boy.

"Well, it's the fashion to kick kings nowadays.  I was a pretty good
King--to myself--but those dreadful Oz people wouldn't let me alone.
So I had to abdicate."

"What does that mean?"

"It means to be kicked out.  But let's talk about something pleasant.
Who are you and where did you come from?"

"I'm called Kiki Aru.  I used to live on Mount Munch in the Land of Oz,
but now I'm a wanderer like yourself."

The Nome King gave him a shrewd look.

"I heard that bird say that you transformed yourself into a magpie and
back again.  Is that true?"

Kiki hesitated, but saw no reason to deny it.  He felt that it would
make him appear more important.

"Well--yes," he said.

"Then you're a wizard?"

"No; I only understand transformations," he admitted.

"Well, that's pretty good magic, anyhow," declared old Ruggedo.  "I
used to have some very fine magic, myself, but my enemies took it all
away from me.  Where are you going now?"

"I'm going into the inn, to get some supper and a bed," said Kiki.

"Have you the money to pay for it?" asked the Nome.

"I have one gold piece."

"Which you stole.  Very good.  And you're glad that you're wicked.
Better yet.  I like you, young man, and I'll go to the inn with you if
you'll promise not to eat eggs for supper."

"Don't you like eggs?" asked Kiki.

"I'm afraid of 'em; they're dangerous!" said Ruggedo, with a shudder.

"All right," agreed Kiki; "I won't ask for eggs."

"Then come along," said the Nome.

When they entered the inn, the landlord scowled at Kiki and said:

"I told you I would not feed you unless you had money."

Kiki showed him the gold piece.

"And how about you?" asked the landlord, turning to Ruggedo.  "Have you
money?"

"I've something better," answered the old Nome, and taking a bag from
one of his pockets he poured from it upon the table a mass of
glittering gems--diamonds, rubies and emeralds.

The landlord was very polite to the strangers after that.  He served
them an excellent supper, and while they ate it, the Hyup boy asked his
companion:

"Where did you get so many jewels?"

"Well, I'll tell you," answered the Nome.  "When those Oz people took
my kingdom away from me--just because it was my kingdom and I wanted to
run it to suit myself--they said I could take as many precious stones
as I could carry.  So I had a lot of pockets made in my clothes and
loaded them all up.  Jewels are fine things to have with you when you
travel; you can trade them for anything."

"Are they better than gold pieces?" asked Kiki.

"The smallest of these jewels is worth a hundred gold pieces such as
you stole from the old man."

"Don't talk so loud," begged Kiki, uneasily.  "Some one else might hear
what you are saying."

After supper they took a walk together, and the former Nome King said:

"Do you know the Shaggy Man, and the Scarecrow, and the Tin Woodman,
and Dorothy, and Ozma and all the other Oz people?"

"No," replied the boy, "I have never been away from Mount Munch until I
flew over the Deadly Desert the other day in the shape of a hawk."

"Then you've never seen the Emerald City of Oz?"

"Never."

"Well," said the Nome, "I knew all the Oz people, and you can guess I
do not love them.  All during my wanderings I have brooded on how I can
be revenged on them.  Now that I've met you I can see a way to conquer
the Land of Oz and be King there myself, which is better than being
King of the Nomes."

"How can you do that?" inquired Kiki Aru, wonderingly.

"Never mind how.  In the first place, I'll make a bargain with you.
Tell me the secret of how to perform transformations and I will give
you a pocketful of jewels, the biggest and finest that I possess."

"No," said Kiki, who realized that to share his power with another
would be dangerous to himself.

"I'll give you TWO pocketsful of jewels," said the Nome.

"No," answered Kiki.

"I'll give you every jewel I possess."

"No, no, no!" said Kiki, who was beginning to be frightened.

"Then," said the Nome, with a wicked look at the boy, "I'll tell the
inn-keeper that you stole that gold piece and he will have you put in
prison."

Kiki laughed at the threat.

"Before he can do that," said he, "I will transform myself into a lion
and tear him to pieces, or into a bear and eat him up, or into a fly
and fly away where he could not find me."

"Can you really do such wonderful transformations?" asked the old Nome,
looking at him curiously.

"Of course," declared Kiki.  "I can transform you into a stick of wood,
in a flash, or into a stone, and leave you here by the roadside."

"The wicked Nome shivered a little when he heard that, but it made him
long more than ever to possess the great secret.  After a while he said:

"I'll tell you what I'll do.  If you will help me to conquer Oz and to
transform the Oz people, who are my enemies, into sticks or stones, by
telling me your secret, I'll agree to make YOU the Ruler of all Oz, and
I will be your Prime Minister and see that your orders are obeyed."

"I'll help do that," said Kiki, "but I won't tell you my secret."

The Nome was so furious at this refusal that he jumped up and down with
rage and spluttered and choked for a long time before he could control
his passion.  But the boy was not at all frightened.  He laughed at the
wicked old Nome, which made him more furious than ever.

"Let's give up the idea," he proposed, when Ruggedo had quieted
somewhat.  "I don't know the Oz people you mention and so they are not
my enemies.  If they've kicked you out of your kingdom, that's your
affair--not mine."

"Wouldn't you like to be king of that splendid fairyland?" asked
Ruggedo.

"Yes, I would," replied Kiki Aru; "but you want to be king yourself,
and we would quarrel over it."

"No," said the Nome, trying to deceive him.  "I don't care to be King
of Oz, come to think it over.  I don't even care to live in that
country.  What I want first is revenge.  If we can conquer Oz, I'll get
enough magic then to conquer my own Kingdom of the Nomes, and I'll go
back and live in my underground caverns, which are more home-like than
the top of the earth.  So here's my proposition: Help me conquer Oz and
get revenge, and help me get the magic away from Glinda and the Wizard,
and I'll let you be King of Oz forever afterward."

"I'll think it over," answered Kiki, and that is all he would say that
evening.

In the night when all in the Inn were asleep but himself, old Ruggedo
the Nome rose softly from his couch and went into the room of Kiki Aru
the Hyup, and searched everywhere for the magic tool that performed his
transformations.  Of course, there was no such tool, and although
Ruggedo searched in all the boy's pockets, he found nothing magical
whatever.  So he went back to his bed and began to doubt that Kiki
could perform transformations.

Next morning he said:

"Which way do you travel to-day?"

"I think I shall visit the Rose Kingdom," answered the boy.

"That is a long journey," declared the Nome.

"I shall transform myself into a bird," said Kiki, "and so fly to the
Rose Kingdom in an hour."

"Then transform me, also, into a bird, and I will go with you,"
suggested Ruggedo.  "But, in that case, let us fly together to the Land
of Oz, and see what it looks like."

Kiki thought this over.  Pleasant as were the countries he had visited,
he heard everywhere that the Land of Oz was more beautiful and
delightful.  The Land of Oz was his own country, too, and if there was
any possibility of his becoming its King, he must know something about
it.

While Kiki the Hyup thought, Ruggedo the Nome was also thinking.  This
boy possessed a marvelous power, and although very simple in some ways,
he was determined not to part with his secret.  However, if Ruggedo
could get him to transport the wily old Nome to Oz, which he could
reach in no other way, he might then induce the boy to follow his
advice and enter into the plot for revenge, which he had already
planned in his wicked heart.

"There are wizards and magicians in Oz," remarked Kiki, after a time.
"They might discover us, in spite of our transformations."

"Not if we are careful," Ruggedo assured him.  "Ozma has a Magic
Picture, in which she can see whatever she wishes to see; but Ozma will
know nothing of our going to Oz, and so she will not command her Magic
Picture to show where we are or what we are doing.  Glinda the Good has
a Great Book called the Book of Records, in which is magically written
everything that people do in the Land of Oz, just the instant they do
it."

"Then," said Kiki, "there is no use our attempting to conquer the
country, for Glinda would read in her book all that we do, and as her
magic is greater than mine, she would soon put a stop to our plans."

"I said 'people,' didn't I?" retorted the Nome.  "The book doesn't make
a record of what birds do, or beasts.  It only tells the doings of
people.  So, if we fly into the country as birds, Glinda won't know
anything about it."

"Two birds couldn't conquer the Land of Oz," asserted the boy,
scornfully.

"No; that's true," admitted Ruggedo, and then he rubbed his forehead
and stroked his long pointed beard and thought some more.

"Ah, now I have the idea!" he declared.  "I suppose you can transform
us into beasts as well as birds?"

"Of course."

"And can you make a bird a beast, and a beast a bird again, without
taking a human form in between?"

"Certainly," said Kiki.  "I can transform myself or others into
anything that can talk.  There's a magic word that must be spoken in
connection with the transformations, and as beasts and birds and
dragons and fishes can talk in Oz, we may become any of these we desire
to.  However, if I transformed myself into a tree, I would always
remain a tree, because then I could not utter the magic word to change
the transformation."

"I see; I see," said Ruggedo, nodding his bushy, white head until the
point of his hair waved back and forth like a pendulum.  "That fits in
with my idea, exactly.  Now, listen, and I'll explain to you my plan.
We'll fly to Oz as birds and settle in one of the thick forests in the
Gillikin Country.  There you will transform us into powerful beasts,
and as Glinda doesn't keep any track of the doings of beasts we can act
without being discovered."

"But how can two beasts raise an army to conquer the powerful people of
Oz?" inquired Kiki.

"That's easy.  But not an army of PEOPLE, mind you.  That would be
quickly discovered.  And while we are in Oz you and I will never resume
our human forms until we've conquered the country and destroyed Glinda,
and Ozma, and the Wizard, and Dorothy, and all the rest, and so have
nothing more to fear from them."

"It is impossible to kill anyone in the Land of Oz," declared Kiki.

"It isn't necessary to kill the Oz people," rejoined Ruggedo.

"I'm afraid I don't understand you," objected the boy.  "What will
happen to the Oz people, and what sort of an army could we get
together, except of people?"

"I'll tell you.  The forests of Oz are full of beasts.  Some of them,
in the far-away places, are savage and cruel, and would gladly follow a
leader as savage as themselves.  They have never troubled the Oz people
much, because they had no leader to urge them on, but we will tell them
to help us conquer Oz and as a reward we will transform all the beasts
into men and women, and let them live in the houses and enjoy all the
good things; and we will transform all the people of Oz into beasts of
various sorts, and send them to live in the forests and the jungles.
That is a splendid idea, you must admit, and it's so easy that we won't
have any trouble at all to carry it through to success."

"Will the beasts consent, do you think?" asked the boy.

"To be sure they will.  We can get every beast in Oz on our
side--except a few who live in Ozma's palace, and they won't count."




4.  Conspirators


Kiki Aru didn't know much about Oz and didn't know much about the
beasts who lived there, but the old Nome's plan seemed to him to be
quite reasonable.  He had a faint suspicion that Ruggedo meant to get
the best of him in some way, and he resolved to keep a close watch on
his fellow-conspirator.  As long as he kept to himself the secret word
of the transformations, Ruggedo would not dare to harm him, and he
promised himself that as soon as they had conquered Oz, he would
transform the old Nome into a marble statue and keep him in that form
forever.

Ruggedo, on his part, decided that he could, by careful watching and
listening, surprise the boy's secret, and when he had learned the magic
word he would transform Kiki Aru into a bundle of faggots and burn him
up and so be rid of him.

This is always the way with wicked people.  They cannot be trusted even
by one another.  Ruggedo thought he was fooling Kiki, and Kiki thought
he was fooling Ruggedo; so both were pleased.

"It's a long way across the Desert," remarked the boy, "and the sands
are hot and send up poisonous vapors.  Let us wait until evening and
then fly across in the night when it will be cooler."

The former Nome King agreed to this, and the two spent the rest of that
day in talking over their plans.  When evening came they paid the
inn-keeper and walked out to a little grove of trees that stood near by.

"Remain here for a few minutes and I'll soon be back," said Kiki, and
walking swiftly away, he left the Nome standing in the grove.  Ruggedo
wondered where he had gone, but stood quietly in his place until, all
of a sudden, his form changed to that of a great eagle, and he uttered
a piercing cry of astonishment and flapped his wings in a sort of
panic.  At once his eagle cry was answered from beyond the grove, and
another eagle, even larger and more powerful than the transformed
Ruggedo, came sailing through the trees and alighted beside him.

"Now we are ready for the start," said the voice of Kiki, coming from
the eagle.

Ruggedo realized that this time he had been outwitted.  He had thought
Kiki would utter the magic word in his presence, and so he would learn
what it was, but the boy had been too shrewd for that.

As the two eagles mounted high into the air and began their flight
across the great Desert that separates the Land of Oz from all the rest
of the world, the Nome said:

"When I was King of the Nomes I had a magic way of working
transformations that I thought was good, but it could not compare with
your secret word.  I had to have certain tools and make passes and say
a lot of mystic words before I could transform anybody."

"What became of your magic tools?" inquired Kiki.

"The Oz people took them all away from me--that horrid girl, Dorothy,
and that terrible fairy, Ozma, the Ruler of Oz--at the time they took
away my underground kingdom and kicked me upstairs into the cold,
heartless world."

"Why did you let them do that?" asked the boy.

"Well," said Ruggedo, "I couldn't help it.  They rolled eggs at
me--EGGS--dreadful eggs!--and if an egg even touches a Nome, he is
ruined for life."

"Is any kind of an egg dangerous to a Nome?"

"Any kind and every kind.  An egg is the only thing I'm afraid of."




5.  A Happy Corner of Oz


There is no other country so beautiful as the Land of Oz.  There are no
other people so happy and contented and prosperous as the Oz people.
They have all they desire; they love and admire their beautiful girl
Ruler, Ozma of Oz, and they mix work and play so justly that both are
delightful and satisfying and no one has any reason to complain.  Once
in a while something happens in Oz to disturb the people's happiness
for a brief time, for so rich and attractive a fairyland is sure to
make a few selfish and greedy outsiders envious, and therefore certain
evil-doers have treacherously plotted to conquer Oz and enslave its
people and destroy its girl Ruler, and so gain the wealth of Oz for
themselves.  But up to the time when the cruel and crafty Nome,
Ruggedo, conspired with Kiki Aru, the Hyup, all such attempts had
failed.  The Oz people suspected no danger.  Life in the world's nicest
fairyland was one round of joyous, happy days.

In the center of the Emerald City of Oz, the capital city of Ozma's
dominions, is a vast and beautiful garden, surrounded by a wall inlaid
with shining emeralds, and in the center of this garden stands Ozma's
Royal Palace, the most splendid building ever constructed.  From a
hundred towers and domes floated the banners of Oz, which included the
Ozmies, the Munchkins, the Gillikins, the Winkies and the Quadlings.
The banner of the Munchkins is blue, that of the Winkies yellow; the
Gillikin banner is purple, and the Quadling's banner is red.  The
colors of the Emerald City are of course green.  Ozma's own banner has
a green center, and is divided into four quarters.  These quarters are
colored blue, purple, yellow and red, indicating that she rules over
all the countries of the Land of Oz.

This fairyland is so big, however, that all of it is not yet known to
its girl Ruler, and it is said that in some far parts of the country,
in forests and mountain fastnesses, in hidden valleys and thick
jungles, are people and beasts that know as little about Ozma as she
knows of them.  Still, these unknown subjects are not nearly so
numerous as the known inhabitants of Oz, who occupy all the countries
near to the Emerald City.  Indeed, I'm sure it will not be long until
all parts of the fairyland of Oz are explored and their peoples made
acquainted with their Ruler, for in Ozma's palace are several of her
friends who are so curious that they are constantly discovering new and
extraordinary places and inhabitants.

One of the most frequent discoverers of these hidden places in Oz is a
little Kansas girl named Dorothy, who is Ozma's dearest friend and
lives in luxurious rooms in the Royal Palace.  Dorothy is, indeed, a
Princess of Oz, but she does not like to be called a princess, and
because she is simple and sweet and does not pretend to be anything but
an ordinary little girl, she is called just "Dorothy" by everybody and
is the most popular person, next to Ozma, in all the Land of Oz.

One morning Dorothy crossed the hall of the palace and knocked on the
door of another girl named Trot, also a guest and friend of Ozma.  When
told to enter, Dorothy found that Trot had company, an old sailor-man
with one wooden leg and one meat leg, who was sitting by the open
window puffing smoke from a corn-cob pipe.  This sailor-man was named
Cap'n Bill, and he had accompanied Trot to the Land of Oz and was her
oldest and most faithful comrade and friend.  Dorothy liked Cap'n Bill,
too, and after she had greeted him, she said to Trot:

"You know, Ozma's birthday is next month, and I've been wondering what
I can give here as a birthday present.  She's so good to us all that we
certainly ought to remember her birthday."

"That's true," agreed Trot.  "I've been wondering, too, what I could
give Ozma.  It's pretty hard to decide, 'cause she's got already all
she wants, and as she's a fairy and knows a lot about magic, she could
satisfy any wish."

"I know," returned Dorothy, "but that isn't the point.  It isn't that
Ozma NEEDS anything, but that it will please her to know we've
remembered her birthday.  But what shall we give her?"

Trot shook her head in despair.

"I've tried to think and I can't," she declared.

"It's the same way with me," said Dorothy.

"I know one thing that 'ud please her," remarked Cap'n Bill, turning
his round face with its fringe of whiskers toward the two girls and
staring at them with his big, light-blue eyes wide open.

"What is it, Cap'n Bill?"

"It's an Enchanted Flower," said he.  "It's a pretty plant that stands
in a golden flower-pot an' grows all sorts o' flowers, one after
another.  One minute a fine rose buds an' blooms, an' then a tulip, an'
next a chrys--chrys--"

"--anthemum," said Dorothy, helping him.

"That's it; and next a dahlia, an' then a daffydil, an' on all through
the range o' posies.  Jus' as soon as one fades away, another comes, of
a different sort, an' the perfume from 'em is mighty snifty, an' they
keeps bloomin' night and day, year in an' year out."

"That's wonderful!" exclaimed Dorothy.  "I think Ozma would like it."

"But where is the Magic Flower, and how can we get it?" asked Trot.

"Dun'no, zac'ly," slowly replied Cap'n Bill.  "The Glass Cat tol' me
about it only yesterday, an' said it was in some lonely place up at the
nor'east o' here.  The Glass Cat goes travelin' all around Oz, you
know, an' the little critter sees a lot o' things no one else does."

"That's true," said Dorothy, thoughtfully.  "Northeast of here must be
in the Munchkin Country, and perhaps a good way off, so let's ask the
Glass Cat to tell us how to get to the Magic Flower."

So the two girls, with Cap'n Bill stumping along on his wooden leg
after them, went out into the garden, and after some time spent in
searching, they found the Glass Cat curled up in the sunshine beside a
bush, fast sleep.

The Glass Cat is one of the most curious creatures in all Oz.  It was
made by a famous magician named Dr. Pipt before Ozma had forbidden her
subjects to work magic.  Dr. Pipt had made the Glass Cat to catch mice,
but the Cat refused to catch mice and was considered more curious than
useful.

This astonished cat was made all of glass and was so clear and
transparent that you could see through it as easily as through a
window.  In the top of its head, however, was a mass of delicate pink
balls which looked like jewels but were intended for brains.  It had a
heart made of blood-red ruby.  The eyes were two large emeralds.  But,
aside from these colors, all the rest of the animal was of clear glass,
and it had a spun-glass tail that was really beautiful.

"Here, wake up,"  said Cap'n Bill.  "We want to talk to you."

Slowly the Glass Cat got upon its feed, yawned and then looked at the
three who stood before it.

"How dare you disturb me?" it asked in a peevish voice.  "You ought to
be ashamed of yourselves."

"Never mind that," returned the Sailor.  "Do you remember tellin' me
yesterday 'bout a Magic Flower in a Gold Pot?"

"Do you think I'm a fool?  Look at my brains--you can see 'em work.  Of
course I remember!" said the cat.

"Well, where can we find it?"

"You can't.  It's none of your business, anyhow.  Go away and let me
sleep," advised the Glass Cat.

"Now, see here," said Dorothy; "we want the Magic Flower to give to
Ozma on her birthday.  You'd be glad to please Ozma, wouldn't you?"

"I'm not sure," replied the creature.  "Why should I want to please
anybody?"

"You've got a heart, 'cause I can see it inside of you," said Trot.

"Yes; it's a pretty heart, and I'm fond of it," said the cat, twisting
around to view its own body.  "But it's made from a ruby, and it's hard
as nails."

"Aren't you good for ANYthing?" asked Trot.

"Yes, I'm pretty to look at, and that's more than can be said of you,"
retorted the creature.

Trot laughed at this, and Dorothy, who understood the Glass Cat pretty
well, said soothingly:

"You are indeed beautiful, and if you can tell Cap'n Bill where to find
the Magic Flower, all the people in Oz will praise your cleverness.
The Flower will belong to Ozma, but everyone will know the Glass Cat
discovered it."

This was the kind of praise the crystal creature liked.

"Well," it said, while the pink brains rolled around, "I found the
Magic Flower way up in the north of the Munchkin Country where few
people live or ever go.  There's a river there that flows through a
forest, and in the middle of the forest there is a small island on
which stands the gold pot in which grows the Magic Flower."

"How did you get to the island?" asked Dorothy.  "Glass cats can't
swim."

"No, but I'm not afraid of water," was the reply.  "I just walked
across the river on the bottom."

"Under the water?" exclaimed Trot.

The cat gave her a scornful look.

"How could I walk OVER the water on the BOTTOM of the river?  If you
were transparent, anyone could see YOUR brains were not working.  But
I'm sure you could never find the place alone.  It has always been
hidden from the Oz people."

"But you, with your fine pink brains, could find it again, I s'pose,"
remarked Dorothy.

"Yes; and if you want that Magic Flower for Ozma, I'll go with you and
show you the way."

"That's lovely of you!" declared Dorothy.  "Trot and Cap'n Bill will go
with you, for this is to be their birthday present to Ozma.  While
you're gone I'll have to find something else to give her."

"All right.  Come on, then, Cap'n," said the Glass Cat, starting to
move away.

"Wait a minute," begged Trot.  "How long will we be gone?"

"Oh, about a week."

"Then I'll put some things in a basket to take with us," said the girl,
and ran into the palace to make her preparations for the journey.




6.  Ozma's Birthday Presents


When Cap'n Bill and Trot and the Glass Cat had started for the hidden
island in the far-off river to get the Magic Flower, Dorothy wondered
again what she could give Ozma on her birthday.  She met the Patchwork
Girl and said:

"What are you going to give Ozma for a birthday present?"

"I've written a song for her," answered the strange Patchwork Girl, who
went by the name of "Scraps," and who, through stuffed with cotton, had
a fair assortment of mixed brains.  "It's a splendid song and the
chorus runs this way:

  I am crazy;
  You're a daisy,
    Ozma dear;
  I'm demented;
  You're contented,
    Ozma dear;
  I am patched and gay and glary;
  You're a sweet and lovely fairy;
  May your birthdays all be happy,
    Ozma dear!"


"How do you like it, Dorothy?" inquired the Patchwork Girl.

"Is it good poetry, Scraps?" asked Dorothy, doubtfully.

"It's as good as any ordinary song," was the reply.  "I have given it a
dandy title, too.  I shall call the song: 'When Ozma Has a Birthday,
Everybody's Sure to Be Gay, for She Cannot Help the Fact That She Was
Born.'"

"That's a pretty long title, Scraps," said Dorothy.

"That makes it stylish," replied the Patchwork Girl, turning a
somersault and alighting on one stuffed foot. "Now-a-days the titles
are sometimes longer than the songs."

Dorothy left her and walked slowly toward the place, where she met the
Tin Woodman just going up the front steps.

"What are you going to give Ozma on her birthday?" she asked.

"It's a secret, but I'll tell you," replied the Tin Woodman, who was
Emperor of the Winkies.  "I am having my people make Ozma a lovely
girdle set with beautiful tin nuggets.  Each tin nugget will be
surrounded by a circle of emeralds, just to set it off to good
advantage.  The clasp of the girdle will be pure tin!  Won't that be
fine?"

"I'm sure she'll like it," said Dorothy.  "Do you know what I can give
her?"

"I haven't the slightest idea, Dorothy.  It took me three months to
think of my own present for Ozma."

The girl walked thoughtfully around to the back of the palace, and
presently came upon the famous Scarecrow of Oz, who has having two of
the palace servants stuff his legs with fresh straw.

"What are you going to give Ozma on her birthday?" asked Dorothy.

"I want to surprise her," answered the Scarecrow.

"I won't tell," promised Dorothy.

"Well, I'm having some straw slippers made for her--all straw, mind
you, and braided very artistically.  Ozma has always admired my straw
filling, so I'm sure she'll be pleased with these lovely straw
slippers."

"Ozma will be pleased with anything her loving friends give her," said
the girl.  "What I'M worried about, Scarecrow, is what to give Ozma
that she hasn't got already."

"That's what worried me, until I thought of the slippers," said the
Scarecrow.  "You'll have to THINK, Dorothy; that's the only way to get
a good idea.  If I hadn't such wonderful brains, I'd never have thought
of those straw foot-decorations."

Dorothy left him and went to her room, where she sat down and tried to
think hard.  A Pink Kitten was curled up on the window-sill and Dorothy
asked her:

"What can I give Ozma for her birthday present?"

"Oh, give her some milk," replied the Pink Kitten; "that's the nicest
thing I know of."

A fuzzy little black dog had squatted down at Dorothy's feet and now
looked up at her with intelligent eyes.

"Tell me, Toto," said the girl; "what would Ozma like best for a
birthday present?"

The little black dog wagged his tail.

"Your love," said he.  "Ozma wants to be loved more than anything else."

"But I already love her, Toto!"

"Then tell her you love her twice as much as you ever did before."

"That wouldn't be true," objected Dorothy, "for I've always loved her
as much as I could, and, really, Toto, I want to give Ozma some
PRESENT, 'cause everyone else will give her a present."

"Let me see," said Toto.  "How would it be to give her that useless
Pink Kitten?"

"No, Toto; that wouldn't do."

"Then six kisses."

"No; that's no present."

"Well, I guess you'll have to figure it out for yourself, Dorothy,"
said the little dog.  "To MY notion you're more particular than Ozma
will be."

Dorothy decided that if anyone could help her it would be Glinda the
Good, the wonderful Sorceress of Oz who was Ozma's faithful subject and
friend.  But Glinda's castle was in the Quadling Country and quite a
journey from the Emerald City.

So the little girl went to Ozma and asked permission to use the Wooden
Sawhorse and the royal Red Wagon to pay a visit to Glinda, and the girl
Ruler kissed Princess Dorothy and graciously granted permission.

The Wooden Sawhorse was one of the most remarkable creatures in Oz.
Its body was a small log and its legs were limbs of trees stuck in the
body.  Its eyes were knots, its mouth was sawed in the end of the log
and its ears were two chips.  A small branch had been left at the rear
end of the log to serve as a tail.

Ozma herself, during one of her early adventures, had brought this
wooden horse to life, and so she was much attached to the queer animal
and had shod the bottoms of its wooden legs with plates of gold so they
would not wear out.  The Sawhorse was a swift and willing traveler, and
though it could talk if need arose, it seldom said anything unless
spoken to.  When the Sawhorse was harnessed to the Red Wagon there were
no reins to guide him because all that was needed was to tell him where
to go.

Dorothy now told him to go to Glinda's Castle and the Sawhorse carried
her there with marvelous speed.

"Glinda," said Dorothy, when she had been greeted by the Sorceress, who
was tall and stately, with handsome and dignified features and dressed
in a splendid and becoming gown, "what are you going to give Ozma for a
birthday present?"

The Sorceress smiled and answered:

"Come into my patio and I will show you."

So they entered a place that was surrounded by the wings of the great
castle but had no roof, and was filled with flowers and fountains and
exquisite statuary and many settees and chairs of polished marble or
filigree gold.  Here there were gathered fifty beautiful young girls,
Glinda's handmaids, who had been selected from all parts of the Land of
Oz on account of their wit and beauty and sweet dispositions.  It was a
great honor to be made one of Glinda's handmaidens.

When Dorothy followed the Sorceress into this delightful patio all the
fifty girls were busily weaving, and their shuttles were filled with a
sparkling green spun glass such as the little girl had never seen
before.

"What is it, Glinda?" she asked.

"One of my recent discoveries," explained the Sorceress.  "I have found
a way to make threads from emeralds, by softening the stones and then
spinning them into long, silken strands.  With these emerald threads we
are weaving cloth to make Ozma a splendid court gown for her birthday.
You will notice that the threads have all the beautiful glitter and
luster of the emeralds from which they are made, and so Ozma's new
dress will be the most magnificent the world has ever seen, and quite
fitting for our lovely Ruler of the Fairyland of Oz."

Dorothy's eyes were fairly dazed by the brilliance of the emerald
cloth, some of which the girls had already woven.

"I've never seen ANYthing so beautiful!" she said, with a sigh.  "But
tell me, Glinda, what can I give our lovely Ozma on her birthday?"

The good Sorceress considered this question for a long time before she
replied.  Finally she said:

"Of course there will be a grand feast at the Royal Palace on Ozma's
birthday, and all our friends will be present.  So I suggest that you
make a fine big birthday cake of Ozma, and surround it with candles."

"Oh, just a CAKE!" exclaimed Dorothy, in disappointment.

"Nothing is nicer for a birthday," said the Sorceress.

"How many candles should there be on the cake?" asked the girl.

"Just a row of them," replied Glinda, "for no one knows how old Ozma
is, although she appears to us to be just a young girl--as fresh and
fair as if she had lived but a few years."

"A cake doesn't seem like much of a present," Dorothy asserted.

"Make it a surprise cake," suggested the Sorceress.  "Don't you
remember the four and twenty blackbirds that were baked in a pie?
Well, you need not use live blackbirds in your cake, but you could have
some surprise of a different sort."

"Like what?" questioned Dorothy, eagerly.

"If I told you, it wouldn't be YOUR present to Ozma, but MINE,"
answered the Sorceress, with a smile.  "Think it over, my dear, and I
am sure you can originate a surprise that will add greatly to the joy
and merriment of Ozma's birthday banquet."

Dorothy thanked her friend and entered the Red Wagon and told the
Sawhorse to take her back home to the palace in the Emerald City.

On the way she thought the matter over seriously of making a surprise
birthday cake and finally decided what to do.

As soon as she reached home, she went to the Wizard of Oz, who had a
room fitted up in one of the high towers of the palace, where he
studied magic so as to be able to perform such wizardry as Ozma
commanded him to do for the welfare of her subjects.

The Wizard and Dorothy were firm friends and had enjoyed many strange
adventures together.  He was a little man with a bald head and sharp
eyes and a round, jolly face, and because he was neither haughty nor
proud he had become a great favorite with the Oz people.

"Wizard," said Dorothy, "I want you to help me fix up a present for
Ozma's birthday."

"I'll be glad to do anything for you and for Ozma," he answered.
"What's on your mind, Dorothy?"

"I'm going to make a great cake, with frosting and candles, and all
that, you know."

"Very good," said the Wizard.

"In the center of this cake I'm going to leave a hollow place, with
just a roof of the frosting over it," continued the girl.

"Very good," repeated the Wizard, nodding his bald head.

"In that hollow place," said Dorothy, "I want to hide a lot of monkeys
about three inches high, and after the cake is placed on the banquet
table, I want the monkeys to break through the frosting and dance
around on the table-cloth.  Then, I want each monkey to cut out a piece
of cake and hand it to a guest."

"Mercy me!" cried the little Wizard, as he chuckled with laughter.  "Is
that ALL you want, Dorothy?"

"Almost," said she.  "Can you think of anything more the little monkeys
can do, Wizard?"

"Not just now," he replied.  "But where will you get such tiny monkeys?"

"That's where you're to help me," said Dorothy.  "In some of those wild
forests in the Gillikin Country are lots of monkeys."

"Big ones," said the Wizard.

"Well, you and I will go there, and we'll get some of the big monkeys,
and you will make them small--just three inches high--by means of your
magic, and we'll put the little monkeys all in a basket and bring them
home with us.  Then you'll train them to dance--up here in your room,
where no one can see them--and on Ozma's birthday we'll put 'em into
the cake and they'll know by that time just what to do."

The Wizard looked at Dorothy with admiring approval, and chuckled again.

"That's really clever, my dear," he said, "and I see no reason why we
can't do it, just the way you say, if only we can get the wild monkeys
to agree to it."

"Do you think they'll object?" asked the girl.

"Yes; but perhaps we can argue them into it.  Anyhow it's worth trying,
and I'll help you if you'll agree to let this Surprise Cake be a
present to Ozma from you and me together.  I've been wondering what I
could give Ozma, and as I've got to train the monkeys as well as make
them small, I think you ought to make me your partner."

"Of course," said Dorothy; "I'll be glad to do so."

"Then it's a bargain," declared the Wizard.  "We must go to seek those
monkeys at once, however, for it will take time to train them and we'll
have to travel a good way to the Gillikin forests where they live."

"I'm ready to go any time," agreed Dorothy.  "Shall we ask Ozma to let
us take the Sawhorse?"

The Wizard did not answer that at once.  He took time to think of the
suggestion.

"No," he answered at length, "the Red Wagon couldn't get through the
thick forests and there's some danger to us in going into the wild
places to search for monkeys.  So I propose we take the Cowardly Lion
and the Hungry Tiger.  We can ride on their backs as well as in the Red
Wagon, and if there is danger to us from other beasts, these two
friendly champions will protect us from all harm."

"That's a splendid idea!" exclaimed Dorothy.  "Let's go now and ask the
Hungry Tiger and the Cowardly Lion if they will help us.  Shall we ask
Ozma if we can go?"

"I think not," said the Wizard, getting his hat and his black bag of
magic tools.  "This is to be a surprise for her birthday, and so she
mustn't know where we're going.  We'll just leave word, in case Ozma
inquires for us, that we'll be back in a few days."




7.  The Forest of Gugu


In the central western part of the Gillikin Country is a great tangle
of trees called Gugu Forest.  It is the biggest forest in all Oz and
stretches miles and miles in every direction--north, south, east and
west.  Adjoining it on the east side is a range of rugged mountains
covered with underbrush and small twisted trees.  You can find this
place by looking at the Map of the Land of Oz.

Gugu Forest is the home of most of the wild beasts that inhabit Oz.
These are seldom disturbed in their leafy haunts because there is no
reason why Oz people should go there, except on rare occasions, and
most parts of the forest have never been seen by any eyes but the eyes
of the beasts who make their home there.  The biggest beasts inhabit
the great forest, while the smaller ones live mostly in the mountain
underbrush at the east.

Now, you must know that there are laws in the forests, as well as in
every other place, and these laws are made by the beasts themselves,
and are necessary to keep them from fighting and tearing one another to
pieces.  In Gugu Forest there is a King--an enormous yellow leopard
called "Gugu"--after whom the forest is named.  And this King has three
other beasts to advise him in keeping the laws and maintaining
order--Bru the Bear, Loo the Unicorn and Rango the Gray Ape--who are
known as the King's Counselors.  All these are fierce and ferocious
beasts, and hold their high offices because they are more intelligent
and more feared then their fellows.

Since Oz became a fairyland, no man, woman or child ever dies in that
land nor is anyone ever sick.  Likewise the beasts of the forests never
die, so that long years add to their cunning and wisdom, as well as to
their size and strength.  It is possible for beasts--or even people--to
be destroyed, but the task is so difficult that it is seldom attempted.
Because it is free from sickness and death is one reason why Oz is a
fairyland, but it is doubtful whether those who come to Oz from the
outside world, as Dorothy and Button-Bright and Trot and Cap'n Bill and
the Wizard did, will live forever or cannot be injured.  Even Ozma is
not sure about this, and so the guests of Ozma from other lands are
always carefully protected from any danger, so as to be on the safe
side.

In spite of the laws of the forests there are often fights among the
beasts; some of them have lost an eye or an ear or even had a leg torn
off.  The King and the King's Counselors always punish those who start
a fight, but so fierce is the nature of some beasts that they will at
times fight in spite of laws and punishment.

Over this vast, wild Forest of Gugu flew two eagles, one morning, and
near the center of the jungle the eagles alighted on a branch of a tall
tree.

"Here is the place for us to begin our work," said one, who was
Ruggedo, the Nome.

"Do many beasts live here?" asked Kiki Aru, the other eagle.

"The forest is full of them," said the Nome.  "There are enough beasts
right here to enable us to conquer the people of Oz, if we can get them
to consent to join us.  To do that, we must go among them and tell them
our plans, so we must now decide on what shapes we had better assume
while in the forest."

"I suppose we must take the shapes of beasts?" said Kiki.

"Of course.  But that requires some thought.  All kinds of beasts live
here, and a yellow leopard is King.  If we become leopards, the King
will be jealous of us.  If we take the forms of some of the other
beasts, we shall not command proper respect."

"I wonder if the beasts will attack us?" asked Kiki.

"I'm a Nome, and immortal, so nothing can hurt me," replied Ruggedo.

"I was born in the Land of Oz, so nothing can hurt me," said Kiki.

"But, in order to carry out our plans, we must win the favor of all the
animals of the forest."

"Then what shall we do?" asked Kiki.

"Let us mix the shapes of several beasts, so we will not look like any
one of them," proposed the wily old Nome.  "Let us have the heads of
lions, the bodies of monkeys, the wings of eagles and the tails of wild
asses, with knobs of gold on the end of them instead of bunches of
hair."

"Won't that make a queer combination?" inquired Kiki.

"The queerer the better," declared Ruggedo.

"All right," said Kiki.  "You stay here, and I'll fly away to another
tree and transform us both, and then we'll climb down our trees and
meet in the forest."

"No," said the Nome, "we mustn't separate.  You must transform us while
we are together."

"I won't do that," asserted Kiki, firmly.  "You're trying to get my
secret, and I won't let you."

The eyes of the other eagle flashed angrily, but Ruggedo did not dare
insist.  If he offended this boy, he might have to remain an eagle
always and he wouldn't like that.  Some day he hoped to be able to
learn the secret word of the magical transformations, but just now he
must let Kiki have his own way.

"All right," he said gruffly; "do as you please."

So Kiki flew to a tree that was far enough distant so that Ruggedo
could not overhear him and said: "I want Ruggedo, the Nome, and myself
to have the heads of lions, the bodies of monkeys, the wings of eagles
and the tails of wild asses, with knobs of gold on the ends of them
instead of bunches of hair--Pyrzqxgl!"

He pronounced the magic word in the proper manner and at once his form
changed to the one he had described.  He spread his eagle's wings and
finding they were strong enough to support his monkey body and lion
head he flew swiftly to the tree where he had left Ruggedo.  The Nome
was also transformed and was climbing down the tree because the
branches all around him were so thickly entwined that there was no room
between them to fly.

Kiki quickly joined his comrade and it did not take them long to reach
the ground.




8.  The Li-Mon-Eags Make Trouble


There had been trouble in the Forest of Gugu that morning.  Chipo the
Wild Boar had bitten the tail off Arx the Giraffe while the latter had
his head among the leaves of a tree, eating his breakfast.  Arx kicked
with his heels and struck Tirrip, the great Kangaroo, who had a new
baby in her pouch.  Tirrip knew it was the Wild Boar's fault, so she
knocked him over with one powerful blow and then ran away to escape
Chipo's sharp tusks.  In the chase that followed a giant porcupine
stuck fifty sharp quills into the Boar and a chimpanzee in a tree threw
a cocoanut at the porcupine that jammed its head into its body.

All this was against the Laws of the Forest, and when the excitement
was over, Gugu the Leopard King called his royal Counselors together to
decide how best to punish the offenders.

The four lords of the forest were holding solemn council in a small
clearing when they saw two strange beasts approaching them--beasts the
like of which they had never seen before.

Not one of the four, however, relaxed his dignity or showed by a
movement that he was startled.  The great Leopard crouched at full
length upon a fallen tree-trunk.  Bru the Bear sat on his haunches
before the King; Rango the Gray Ape stood with his muscular arms
folded, and Loo the Unicorn reclined, much as a horse does, between his
fellow-councillors.  With one consent they remained silent, eyeing with
steadfast looks the intruders, who were making their way into their
forest domain.

"Well met, Brothers!" said one of the strange beasts, coming to a halt
beside the group, while his comrade with hesitation lagged behind.

"We are not brothers," returned the Gray Ape, sternly.  "Who are you,
and how came you in the forest of Gugu?"

"We are two Li-Mon-Eags," said Ruggedo, inventing the name.  "Our home
is in Sky Island, and we have come to earth to warn the forest beasts
that the people of Oz are about to make war upon them and enslave them,
so that they will become beasts of burden forever after and obey only
the will of their two-legged masters."

A low roar of anger arose from the Council of Beasts.

"WHO'S going to do that?" asked Loo the Unicorn, in a high, squeaky
voice, at the same time rising to his feet.

"The people of Oz," said Ruggedo.

"But what will WE be doing?" inquired the Unicorn.

"That's what I've come to talk to you about."

"You needn't talk!  We'll fight the Oz people!" screamed the Unicorn.
"We'll smash 'em; we'll trample 'em; we'll gore 'em; we'll--"

"Silence!" growled Gugu the King, and Loo obeyed, although still
trembling with wrath.  The cold, steady gaze of the Leopard wandered
over the two strange beasts.  "The people of Oz," said he, "have not
been our friends; they have not been our enemies.  They have let us
alone, and we have let them alone.  There is no reason for war between
us.  They have no slaves.  They could not use us as slaves if they
should conquer us.  I think you are telling us lies, you strange
Li-Mon-Eag--you mixed-up beast who are neither one thing nor another."

"Oh, on my word, it's the truth!" protested the Nome in the beast's
shape.  "I wouldn't lie for the world; I--"

"Silence!" again growled Gugu the King; and somehow, even Ruggedo was
abashed and obeyed the edict.

"What do you say, Bru?" asked the King, turning to the great Bear, who
had until now said nothing.

"How does the Mixed Beast know that what he says is true?" asked the
Bear.

"Why, I can fly, you know, having the wings of an Eagle," explained the
Nome.  "I and my comrade yonder," turning to Kiki, "flew to a grove in
Oz, and there we heard the people telling how they will make many ropes
to snare you beasts, and then they will surround this forest, and all
other forests, and make you prisoners.  So we came here to warn you,
for being beasts ourselves, although we live in the sky, we are your
friends."

The Leopard's lip curled and showed his enormous teeth, sharp as
needles.  He turned to the Gray Ape.

"What do YOU think, Rango?" he asked.

"Send these mixed beasts away, Your Majesty," replied the Gray Ape.
"They are mischief-makers."

"Don't do that--don't do that!" cried the Unicorn, nervously.  "The
stranger said he would tell us what to do.  Let him tell us, then.  Are
we fools, not to heed a warning?"

Gugu the King turned to Ruggedo.

"Speak, Stranger," he commanded.

"Well," said the Nome, "it's this way: The Land of Oz is a fine
country.  The people of Oz have many good things--houses with soft
beds, all sorts of nice-tasting food, pretty clothes, lovely jewels,
and many other things that beasts know nothing of.  Here in the dark
forests the poor beasts have hard work to get enough to eat and to find
a bed to rest in.  But the beasts are better than the people, and why
should they not have all the good things the people have?  So I propose
that before the Oz people have the time to make all those ropes to
snare you with, that all we beasts get together and march against the
Oz people and capture them.  Then the beasts will become the masters
and the people their slaves."

"What good would that do us?" asked Bru the Bear.

"It would save you from slavery, for one thing, and you could enjoy all
the fine things of Oz people have."

"Beasts wouldn't know what to do with the things people use," said the
Gray Ape.

"But this is only part of my plan," insisted the Nome.  "Listen to the
rest of it.  We two Li-Mon-Eags are powerful magicians.  When you have
conquered the Oz people we will transform them all into beasts, and
send them to the forests to live, and we will transform all the beasts
into people, so they can enjoy all the wonderful delights of the
Emerald City."

For a moment no beast spoke.  Then the King said: "Prove it."

"Prove what?" asked Ruggedo.

"Prove that you can transform us.  If you are a magician transform the
Unicorn into a man.  Then we will believe you.  If you fail, we will
destroy you."

"All right," said the Nome.  "But I'm tired, so I'll let my comrade
make the transformation."

Kiki Aru had stood back from the circle, but he had heard all that was
said.  He now realized that he must make good Ruggedo's boast, so he
retreated to the edge of the clearing and whispered the magic word.

Instantly the Unicorn became a fat, chubby little man, dressed in the
purple Gillikin costume, and it was hard to tell which was the more
astonished, the King, the Bear, the Ape or the former Unicorn.

"It's true!" shorted the man-beast.  "Good gracious, look what I am!
It's wonderful!"

The King of Beasts now addressed Ruggedo in a more friendly tone.

"We must believe your story, since you have given us proof of your
power," said he.  "But why, if you are so great a magician, cannot you
conquer the Oz people without our help, and so save us the trouble?"

"Alas!" replied the crafty old Nome, "no magician is able to do
everything.  The transformations are easy to us because we are
Li-Mon-Eags, but we cannot fight, or conquer even such weak creatures
as the Oz people.  But we will stay with you and advise and help you,
and we will transform all the Oz people into beasts, when the time
comes, and all the beasts into people."

Gugu the King turned to his Counselors.

"How shall we answer this friendly stranger?" he asked.

Loo the former Unicorn was dancing around and cutting capers like a
clown.

"On my word, your Majesty," he said, "this being a man is more fun than
being a Unicorn."

"You look like a fool," said the Gray Ape.

"Well, I FEEL fine!" declared the man-beast.

"I think I prefer to be a Bear," said Big Bru.  "I was born a Bear, and
I know a Bear's ways.  So I am satisfied to live as a Bear lives."

"That," said the old Nome, "is because you know nothing better.  When
we have conquered the Oz people, and you become a man, you'll be glad
of it."

The immense Leopard rested his chin on the log and seemed thoughtful.

"The beasts of the forest must decide this matter for themselves," he
said.  "Go you, Rango the Gray Ape, and tell your monkey tribe to order
all the forest beasts to assemble in the Great Clearing at sunrise
to-morrow.  When all are gathered together, this mixed-up Beast who is
a magician shall talk to them and tell them what he has told us.  Then,
if they decide to fight the Oz people, who have declared war on us, I
will lead the beasts to battle."

Rango the Gray Ape turned at once and glided swiftly through the forest
on his mission.  The Bear gave a grunt and walked away.  Gugu the King
rose and stretched himself.  Then he said to Ruggedo: "Meet us at
sunrise to-morrow," and with stately stride vanished among the trees.

The man-unicorn, left alone with the strangers, suddenly stopped his
foolish prancing.

"You'd better make me a Unicorn again," he said.  "I like being a man,
but the forest beasts won't know I'm their friend, Loo, and they might
tear me in pieces before morning."

So Kiki changed him back to his former shape, and the Unicorn departed
to join his people.

Ruggedo the Nome was much pleased with his success.

"To-morrow," he said to Kiki Aru, "we'll win over these beasts and set
them to fight and conquer the Oz people.  Then I will have my revenge
on Ozma and Dorothy and all the rest of my enemies."

"But I am doing all the work," said Kiki.

"Never mind; you're going to be King of Oz," promised Ruggedo.

"Will the big Leopard let me be King?" asked the boy anxiously.

The Nome came close to him and whispered:

"If Gugu the Leopard opposes us, you will transform him into a tree,
and then he will be helpless."

"Of course," agreed Kiki, and he said to himself: "I shall also
transform this deceitful Nome into a tree, for he lies and I cannot
trust him."




9.  The Isle of the Magic Flower


The Glass Cat was a good guide and led Trot and Cap'n Bill by straight
and easy paths through all the settled part of the Munchkin Country,
and then into the north section where there were few houses, and
finally through a wild country where there were no houses or paths at
all.  But the walking was not difficult and at last they came to the
edge of a forest and stopped there to make camp and sleep until morning.

From branches of trees Cap'n Bill made a tiny house that was just big
enough for the little girl to crawl into and lie down.  But first they
ate some of the food Trot had carried in the basket.

"Don't you want some, too?" she asked the Glass Cat.

"No," answered the creature.

"I suppose you'll hunt around an' catch a mouse," remarked Cap'n Bill.

"Me?  Catch a mouse!  Why should I do that?" inquired the Glass Cat.

"Why, then you could eat it," said the sailor-man.

"I beg to inform you," returned the crystal tabby, "that I do not eat
mice.  Being transparent, so anyone can see through me, I'd look nice,
wouldn't I, with a common mouse inside me?  But the fact is that I
haven't any stomach or other machinery that would permit me to eat
things.  The careless magician who made me didn't think I'd need to
eat, I suppose."

"Don't you ever get hungry or thirsty?" asked Trot.

"Never.  I don't complain, you know, at the way I'm made, for I've
never yet seen any living thing as beautiful as I am.  I have the
handsomest brains in the world.  They're pink, and you can see 'em
work."

"I wonder," said Trot thoughtfully, as she ate her bread and jam, "if
MY brains whirl around in the same way yours do."

"No; not the same way, surely," returned the Glass Cat; "for, in that
case, they'd be as good as MY brains, except that they're hidden under
a thick, boney skull."

"Brains," remarked Cap'n Bill, "is of all kinds and work different
ways.  But I've noticed that them as thinks that their brains is best
is often mistook."

Trot was a little disturbed by sounds from the forest, that night, for
many beasts seemed prowling among the trees, but she was confident
Cap'n Bill would protect her from harm.  And in fact, no beast ventured
from the forest to attack them.

At daybreak they were up again, and after a simple breakfast Cap'n Bill
said to the Glass Cat:

"Up anchor, Mate, and let's forge ahead.  I don't suppose we're far
from that Magic Flower, are we?"

"Not far," answered the transparent one, as it led the way into the
forest, "but it may take you some time to get to it."

Before long they reached the bank of a river.  It was not very wide, at
this place, but as they followed the banks in a northerly direction it
gradually broadened.

Suddenly the blue-green leaves of the trees changed to a purple hue,
and Trot noticed this and said:

"I wonder what made the colors change like that?"

"It's because we have left the Munchkin Country and entered the
Gillikin Country," explained the Glass Cat.  "Also it's a sign our
journey is nearly ended."

The river made a sudden turn, and after the travelers had passed around
the bend, they saw that the stream had now become as broad as a small
lake, and in the center of the Lake they beheld a little island, not
more than fifty feet in extent, either way.  Something glittered in the
middle of this tiny island, and the Glass Cat paused on the bank and
said:

"There is the gold flower-pot containing the Magic Flower, which is
very curious and beautiful.  If you can get to the island, your task is
ended--except to carry the thing home with you."

Cap'n Bill looked at the broad expanse of water and began to whistle a
low, quavering tune.  Trot knew that the whistle meant that Cap'n Bill
was thinking, and the old sailor didn't look at the island as much as
he looked at the trees upon the bank where they stood.  Presently he
took from the big pocket of his coat an axe-blade, wound in an old
cloth to keep the sharp edge from cutting his clothing.  Then, with a
large pocket knife, he cut a small limb from a tree and whittled it
into a handle for his axe.

"Sit down, Trot," he advised the girl, as he worked.  "I've got quite a
job ahead of me now, for I've got to build us a raft."

"What do we need a raft for, Cap'n?"

"Why, to take us to the island.  We can't walk under water, in the
river bed, as the Glass Cat did, so we must float atop the water."

"Can you make a raft, Cap'n Bill?"

"O' course, Trot, if you give me time."

The little girl sat down on a log and gazed at the Island of the Magic
Flower.  Nothing else seemed to grow on the tiny isle.  There was no
tree, no shrub, no grass, even, as far as she could make out from that
distance.  But the gold pot glittered in the rays of the sun, and Trot
could catch glimpses of glowing colors above it, as the Magic Flower
changed from one sort to another.

"When I was here before," remarked the Glass Cat, lazily reclining at
the girl's feet, "I saw two Kalidahs on this very bank, where they had
come to drink."

"What are Kalidahs?" asked the girl.

"The most powerful and ferocious beasts in all Oz.  This forest is
their especial home, and so there are few other beasts to be found
except monkeys.  The monkeys are spry enough to keep out of the way of
the fierce Kalidahs, which attack all other animals and often fight
among themselves."

"Did they try to fight you when you saw 'em?" asked Trot, getting very
much excited.

"Yes.  They sprang upon me in an instant; but I lay flat on the ground,
so I wouldn't get my legs broken by the great weight of the beasts, and
when they tried to bite me I laughed at them and jeered them until they
were frantic with rage, for they nearly broke their teeth on my hard
glass.  So, after a time, they discovered they could not hurt me, and
went away.  It was great fun."

"I hope they don't come here again to drink,--not while we're here,
anyhow," returned the girl, "for I'm not made of glass, nor is Cap'n
Bill, and if those bad beasts bit us, we'd get hurt."

Cap'n Bill was cutting from the trees some long stakes, making them
sharp at one end and leaving a crotch at the other end.  These were to
bind the logs of his raft together.  He had fashioned several and was
just finishing another when the Glass Cat cried: "Look out!  There's a
Kalidah coming toward us."

Trot jumped up, greatly frightened, and looked at the terrible animal
as if fascinated by its fierce eyes, for the Kalidah was looking at
her, too, and its look wasn't at all friendly.  But Cap'n Bill called
to her: "Wade into the river, Trot, up to your knees--an' stay there!"
and she obeyed him at once.  The sailor-man hobbled forward, the stake
in one hand and his axe in the other, and got between the girl and the
beast, which sprang upon him with a growl of defiance.

Cap'n Bill moved pretty slowly, sometimes, but now he was quick as
could be.  As the Kalidah sprang toward him he stuck out his wooden leg
and the point of it struck the beast between the eyes and sent it
rolling upon the ground.  Before it could get upon its feet again the
sailor pushed the sharp stake right through its body and then with the
flat side of the axe he hammered the stake as far into the ground as it
would go.  By this means he captured the great beast and made it
harmless, for try as it would, it could not get away from the stake
that held it.

Cap'n Bill knew he could not kill the Kalidah, for no living thing in
Oz can be killed, so he stood back and watched the beast wriggle and
growl and paw the earth with its sharp claws, and then, satisfied it
could not escape, he told Trot to come out of the water again and dry
her wet shoes and stockings in the sun.

"Are you sure he can't get away?" she asked.

"I'd bet a cookie on it," said Cap'n Bill, so Trot came ashore and took
off her shoes and stockings and laid them on the log to dry, while the
sailor-man resumed his work on the raft.

The Kalidah, realizing after many struggles that it could not escape,
now became quiet, but it said in a harsh, snarling voice:

"I suppose you think you're clever, to pin me to the ground in this
manner.  But when my friends, the other Kalidahs, come here, they'll
tear you to pieces for treating me this way."

"P'raps," remarked Cap'n Bill, coolly, as he chopped at the logs, "an'
p'raps not.  When are your folks comin' here?"

"I don't know," admitted the Kalidah.  "But when they DO come, you
can't escape them."

"If they hold off long enough, I'll have my raft ready," said Cap'n
Bill.

"What are you going to do with a raft?" inquired the beast.

"We're goin' over to that island, to get the Magic Flower."

The huge beast looked at him in surprise a moment, and then it began to
laugh.  The laugh was a good deal like a roar, and it had a cruel and
derisive sound, but it was a laugh nevertheless.

"Good!" said the Kalidah.  "Good!  Very good!  I'm glad you're going to
get the Magic Flower.  But what will you do with it?"

"We're going to take it to Ozma, as a present on her birthday."

The Kalidah laughed again; then it became sober.  "If you get to the
land on your raft before my people can catch you," it said, "you will
be safe from us.  We can swim like ducks, so the girl couldn't have
escaped me by getting into the water; but Kalidahs don't go to that
island over there."

"Why not?" asked Trot.

The beast was silent.

"Tell us the reason," urged Cap'n Bill.

"Well, it's the Isle of the Magic Flower," answered the Kalidah, "and
we don't care much for magic.  If you hadn't had a magic leg, instead
of a meat one, you couldn't have knocked me over so easily and stuck
this wooden pin through me."

"I've been to the Magic Isle," said the Glass Cat, "and I've watched
the Magic Flower bloom, and I'm sure it's too pretty to be left in that
lonely place where only beasts prowl around it and no else sees it.  So
we're going to take it away to the Emerald City."

"I don't care," the beast replied in a surly tone.  "We Kalidahs would
be just as contented if there wasn't a flower in our forest.  What good
are the things anyhow?"

"Don't you like pretty things?" asked Trot.

"No."

"You ought to admire my pink brains, anyhow," declared the Glass Cat.
"They're beautiful and you can see 'em work."

The beast only growled in reply, and Cap'n Bill, having now cut all his
logs to a proper size, began to roll them to the water's edge and
fasten them together.




10.  Stuck Fast


The day was nearly gone when, at last, the raft was ready.

"It ain't so very big," said the old sailor, "but I don't weigh much,
an' you, Trot, don't weigh half as much as I do, an' the glass pussy
don't count."

"But it's safe, isn't it?" inquired the girl.

"Yes; it's good enough to carry us to the island an' back again, an'
that's about all we can expect of it."

Saying this, Cap'n Bill pushed the raft into the water, and when it was
afloat, stepped upon it and held out his hand to Trot, who quickly
followed him.  The Glass Cat boarded the raft last of all.

The sailor had cut a long pole, and had also whittled a flat paddle,
and with these he easily propelled the raft across the river.  As they
approached the island, the Wonderful Flower became more plainly
visible, and they quickly decided that the Glass Cat had not praised it
too highly.  The colors of the flowers that bloomed in quick succession
were strikingly bright and beautiful, and the shapes of the blossoms
were varied and curious.  Indeed, they did not resemble ordinary
flowers at all.

So intently did Trot and Cap'n Bill gaze upon the Golden Flower-pot
that held the Magic Flower that they scarcely noticed the island itself
until the raft beached upon its sands.  But then the girl exclaimed:
"How funny it is, Cap'n Bill, that nothing else grows here excep' the
Magic Flower."

Then the sailor glanced at the island and saw that it was all bare
ground, without a weed, a stone or a blade of grass.  Trot, eager to
examine the Flower closer, sprang from the raft and ran up the bank
until she reached the Golden Flower-pot.  Then she stood beside it
motionless and filled with wonder.  Cap'n Bill joined her, coming more
leisurely, and he, too, stood in silent admiration for a time.

"Ozma will like this," remarked the Glass Cat, sitting down to watch
the shifting hues of the flowers.  "I'm sure she won't have as fine a
birthday present from anyone else."

"Do you 'spose it's very heavy, Cap'n?  And can we get it home without
breaking it?" asked Trot anxiously.

"Well, I've lifted many bigger things than that," he replied; "but
let's see what it weighs."

He tried to take a step forward, but could not lift his meat foot from
the ground.  His wooden leg seemed free enough, but the other would not
budge.

"I seem stuck, Trot," he said, with a perplexed look at his foot.  "It
ain't mud, an' it ain't glue, but somethin's holdin' me down."

The girl attempted to lift her own feet, to go nearer to her friend,
but the ground held them as fast as it held Cap'n Bill's foot.  She
tried to slide them, or to twist them around, but it was no use; she
could not move either foot a hair's breadth.

"This is funny!" she exclaimed. "What do you 'spose has happened to us,
Cap'n Bill?"

"I'm tryin' to make out," he answered.  "Take off your shoes, Trot.
P'raps it's the leather soles that's stuck to the ground."

She leaned down and unlaced her shoes, but found she could not pull her
feet out of them.  The Glass Cat, which was walking around as naturally
as ever, now said:

"Your foot has got roots to it, Cap'n, and I can see the roots going
into the ground, where they spread out in all directions.  It's the
same way with Trot.  That's why you can't move.  The roots hold you
fast."

Cap'n Bill was rather fat and couldn't see his own feet very well, but
he squatted down and examined Trot's feet and decided that the Glass
Cat was right.

"This is hard luck," he declared, in a voice that showed he was uneasy
at the discovery.  "We're pris'ners, Trot, on this funny island, an'
I'd like to know how we're ever goin' to get loose, so's we can get
home again."

"Now I know why the Kalidah laughed at us," said the girl, "and why he
said none of the beasts ever came to this island.  The horrid creature
knew we'd be caught, and wouldn't warn us."

In the meantime, the Kalidah, although pinned fast to the earth by
Cap'n Bill's stake, was facing the island, and now the ugly expression
which passed over its face when it defied and sneered at Cap'n Bill and
Trot, had changed to one of amusement and curiosity.  When it saw the
adventurers had actually reached the island and were standing beside
the Magic Flower, it heaved a breath of satisfaction--a long, deep
breath that swelled its deep chest until the beast could feel the stake
that held him move a little, as if withdrawing itself from the ground.

"Ah ha!" murmured the Kalidah, "a little more of this will set me free
and allow me to escape!"

So he began breathing as hard as he could, puffing out his chest as
much as possible with each indrawing breath, and by doing this he
managed to raise the stake with each powerful breath, until at last the
Kalidah--using the muscles of his four legs as well as his deep
breaths--found itself free of the sandy soil.  The stake was sticking
right through him, however, so he found a rock deeply set in the bank
and pressed the sharp point of the stake upon the surface of this rock
until he had driven it clear through his body.  Then, by getting the
stake tangled among some thorny bushes, and wiggling his body, he
managed to draw it out altogether.

"There!" he exclaimed, "except for those two holes in me, I'm as good
as ever; but I must admit that that old wooden-legged fellow saved both
himself and the girl by making me a prisoner."

Now the Kalidahs, although the most disagreeable creatures in the Land
of Oz, were nevertheless magical inhabitants of a magical Fairyland,
and in their natures a certain amount of good was mingled with the
evil.  This one was not very revengeful, and now that his late foes
were in danger of perishing, his anger against them faded away.

"Our own Kalidah King," he reflected, "has certain magical powers of
his own.  Perhaps he knows how to fill up these two holes in my body."

So without paying any more attention to Trot and Cap'n Bill than they
were paying to him, he entered the forest and trotted along a secret
path that led to the hidden lair of all the Kalidahs.

While the Kalidah was making good its escape Cap'n Bill took his pipe
from his pocket and filled it with tobacco and lighted it.  Then, as he
puffed out the smoke, he tried to think what could be done.

"The Glass Cat seems all right," he said, "an' my wooden leg didn't
take roots and grow, either.  So it's only flesh that gets caught."

"It's magic that does it, Cap'n!"

"I know, Trot, and that's what sticks me.  We're livin' in a magic
country, but neither of us knows any magic an' so we can't help
ourselves."

"Couldn't the Wizard of Oz help us--or Glinda the Good?" asked the
little girl.

"Ah, now we're beginnin' to reason," he answered.  "I'd probably
thought o' that, myself, in a minute more.  By good luck the Glass Cat
is free, an' so it can run back to the Emerald City an' tell the Wizard
about our fix, an' ask him to come an' help us get loose."

"Will you go?" Trot asked the cat, speaking very earnestly.

"I'm no messenger, to be sent here and there," asserted the curious
animal in a sulky tone of voice.

"Well," said Cap'n Bill, "you've got to go home, anyhow, 'cause you
don't want to stay here, I take it.  And, when you get home, it
wouldn't worry you much to tell the Wizard what's happened to us."

"That's true," said the cat, sitting on its haunches and lazily washing
its face with one glass paw.  "I don't mind telling the Wizard--when I
get home."

"Won't you go now?" pleaded Trot.  "We don't want to stay here any
longer than we can help, and everybody in Oz will be interested in you,
and call you a hero, and say nice things about you because you helped
your friends out of trouble."

That was the best way to manage the Glass Cat, which was so vain that
it loved to be praised.

"I'm going home right away," said the creature, "and I'll tell the
Wizard to come and help you."

Saying this, it walked down to the water and disappeared under the
surface.  Not being able to manage the raft alone, the Glass Cat walked
on the bottom of the river as it had done when it visited the island
before, and soon they saw it appear on the farther bank and trot into
the forest, where it was quickly lost to sight among the trees.

Then Trot heaved a deep sigh.

"Cap'n," said she, "we're in a bad fix.  There's nothing here to eat,
and we can't even lie down to sleep.  Unless the Glass Cat hurries, and
the Wizard hurries, I don't know what's going to become of us!"




11.  The Beasts of the Forest of Gugu


That was a wonderful gathering of wild animals in the Forest of Gugu
next sunrise.  Rango, the Gray Ape, had even called his monkey
sentinels away from the forest edge, and every beast, little and big,
was in the great clearing where meetings were held on occasions of
great importance.

In the center of the clearing stood a great shelving rock, having a
flat, inclined surface, and on this sat the stately Leopard Gugu, who
was King of the Forest.  On the ground beneath him squatted Bru the
Bear, Loo the Unicorn, and Rango the Gray Ape, the King's three
Counselors, and in front of them stood the two strange beasts who had
called themselves Li-Mon-Eags, but were really the transformations of
Ruggedo the Nome, and Kiki Aru the Hyup.

Then came the beasts--rows and rows and rows of them!  The smallest
beasts were nearest the King's rock throne; then there were wolves and
foxes, lynxes and hyenas, and the like; behind them were gathered the
monkey tribes, who were hard to keep in order because they teased the
other animals and were full of mischievous tricks.  Back of the monkeys
were the pumas, jaguars, tigers and lions, and their kind; next the
bears, all sizes and colors; after them bisons, wild asses, zebras and
unicorns; farther on the rhinoceri and hippopotami, and at the far edge
of the forest, close to the trees that shut in the clearing, was a row
of thick-skinned elephants, still as statues but with eyes bright and
intelligent.

Many other kinds of beasts, too numerous to mention, were there, and
some were unlike any beasts we see in the menageries and zoos in our
country.  Some were from the mountains west of the forest, and some
from the plains at the east, and some from the river; but all present
acknowledged the leadership of Gugu, who for many years had ruled them
wisely and forced all to obey the laws.

When the beasts had taken their places in the clearing and the rising
sun was shooting its first bright rays over the treetops, King Gugu
rose on his throne.  The Leopard's giant form, towering above all the
others, caused a sudden hush to fall on the assemblage.

"Brothers," he said in his deep voice, "a stranger has come among us, a
beast of curious form who is a great magician and is able to change the
shapes of men or beasts at his will.  This stranger has come to us,
with another of his kind, from out of the sky, to warn us of a danger
which threatens us all, and to offer us a way to escape from that
danger.  He says he is our friend, and he has proved to me and to my
Counselors his magic powers.  Will you listen to what he has to say to
you--to the message he has brought from the sky?"

"Let him speak!" came in a great roar from the great company of
assembled beasts.

So Ruggedo the Nome sprang upon the flat rock beside Gugu the King, and
another roar, gentle this time, showed how astonished the beasts were
at the sight of his curious form.  His lion's face was surrounded by a
mane of pure white hair; his eagle's wings were attached to the
shoulders of his monkey body and were so long that they nearly touched
the ground; he had powerful arms and legs in addition to the wings, and
at the end of his long, strong tail was a golden ball.  Never had any
beast beheld such a curious creature before, and so the very sight of
the stranger, who was said to be a great magician, filled all present
with awe and wonder.

Kiki stayed down below and, half hidden by the shelf of rock, was
scarcely noticed.  The boy realized that the old Nome was helpless
without his magic power, but he also realized that Ruggedo was the best
talker.  So he was willing the Nome should take the lead.

"Beasts of the Forest of Gugu," began Ruggedo the Nome, "my comrade and
I are your friends.  We are magicians, and from our home in the sky we
can look down into the Land of Oz and see everything that is going on.
Also we can hear what the people below us are saying.  That is how we
heard Ozma, who rules the Land of Oz, say to her people: 'The beasts in
the Forest of Gugu are lazy and are of no use to us.  Let us go to
their forest and make them all our prisoners.  Let us tie them with
ropes, and beat them with sticks, until they work for us and become our
willing slaves.'  And when the people heard Ozma of Oz say this, they
were glad and raised a great shout and said: 'We will do it!  We will
make the beasts of the Forest of Gugu our slaves!'"

The wicked old Nome could say no more, just then, for such a fierce
roar of anger rose from the multitude of beasts that his voice was
drowned by the clamor.  Finally the roar died away, like distant
thunder, and Ruggedo the Nome went on with his speech.

"Having heard the Oz people plot against your liberty, we watched to
see what they would do, and saw them all begin making ropes--ropes long
and short--with which to snare our friends the beasts.  You are angry,
but we also were angry, for when the Oz people became the enemies of
the beasts they also became our enemies; for we, too, are beasts,
although we live in the sky.  And my comrade and I said: 'We will save
our friends and have revenge on the Oz people,' and so we came here to
tell you of your danger and of our plan to save you."

"We can save ourselves," cried an old Elephant.  "We can fight."

"The Oz people are fairies, and you can't fight against magic unless
you also have magic," answered the Nome.

"Tell us your plan!" shouted the huge Tiger, and the other beasts
echoed his words, crying: "Tell us your plan."

"My plan is simple," replied Ruggedo.  "By our magic we will transform
all you animals into men and women--like the Oz people--and we will
transform all the Oz people into beasts.  You can then live in the fine
houses of the Land of Oz, and eat the fine food of the Oz people, and
wear their fine clothes, and sing and dance and be happy.  And the Oz
people, having become beasts, will have to live here in the forest and
hunt and fight for food, and often go hungry, as you now do, and have
no place to sleep but a bed of leaves or a hole in the ground.  Having
become men and women, you beasts will have all the comforts you desire,
and having become beasts, the Oz people will be very miserable.  That
is our plan, and if you agree to it, we will all march at once into the
Land of Oz and quickly conquer our enemies."

When the stranger ceased speaking, a great silence fell on the
assemblage, for the beasts were thinking of what he had said.  Finally
one of the walruses asked:

"Can you really transform beasts into men, and men into beasts?"

"He can--he can!" cried Loo the Unicorn, prancing up and down in an
excited manner.  "He transformed ME, only last evening, and he can
transform us all."

Gugu the King now stepped forward.

"You have heard the stranger speak," said he, "and now you must answer
him.  It is for you to decide.  Shall we agree to this plan, or not?"

"Yes!" shouted some of the animals.

"No!" shouted others.

And some were yet silent.

Gugu looked around the great circle.

"Take more time to think," he suggested.  "Your answer is very
important.  Up to this time we have had no trouble with the Oz people,
but we are proud and free, and never will become slaves.  Think
carefully, and when you are ready to answer, I will hear you."




12.  Kiki Uses His Magic


Then arose a great confusion of sounds as all the animals began talking
to their fellows.  The monkeys chattered and the bears growled and the
voices of the jaguars and lions rumbled, and the wolves yelped and the
elephants had to trumpet loudly to make their voices heard.  Such a
hubbub had never been known in the forest before, and each beast argued
with his neighbor until it seemed the noise would never cease.

Ruggedo the Nome waved his arms and fluttered his wings to try to make
them listen to him again, but the beasts paid no attention.  Some
wanted to fight the Oz people, some wanted to be transformed, and some
wanted to do nothing at all.

The growling and confusion had grown greater than ever when in a flash
silence fell on all the beasts present, the arguments were hushed, and
all gazed in astonishment at a strange sight.

For into the circle strode a great Lion--bigger and more powerful than
any other lion there--and on his back rode a little girl who smiled
fearlessly at the multitude of beasts.  And behind the Lion and the
little girl came another beast--a monstrous Tiger, who bore upon his
back a funny little man carrying a black bag.  Right past the rows of
wondering beasts the strange animals walked, advancing until they stood
just before the rock throne of Gugu.

Then the little girl and the funny little man dismounted, and the great
Lion demanded in a loud voice:

"Who is King in this forest?"

"I am!" answered Gugu, looking steadily at the other.  "I am Gugu the
Leopard, and I am King of this forest."

"Then I greet Your Majesty with great respect," said the Lion.
"Perhaps you have heard of me, Gugu.  I am called the 'Cowardly Lion,'
and I am King of all Beasts, the world over."

Gugu's eyes flashed angrily.

"Yes," said he, "I have heard of you.  You have long claimed to be King
of Beasts, but no beast who is a coward can be King over me."

"He isn't a coward, Your Majesty," asserted the little girl, "He's just
cowardly, that's all."

Gugu looked at her.  All the other beasts were looking at her, too.

"Who are you?" asked the King.

"Me?  Oh, I'm just Dorothy," she answered.

"How dare you come here?" demanded the King.

"Why, I'm not afraid to go anywhere, if the Cowardly Lion is with me,"
she said.  "I know him pretty well, and so I can trust him.  He's
always afraid, when we get into trouble, and that's why he's cowardly;
but he's a terrible fighter, and that's why he isn't a coward.  He
doesn't like to fight, you know, but when he HAS to, there isn't any
beast living that can conquer him."

Gugu the King looked at the big, powerful form of the Cowardly Lion,
and knew she spoke the truth.  Also the other Lions of the forest now
came forward and bowed low before the strange Lion.

"We welcome Your Majesty," said one.  "We have known you many years
ago, before you went to live at the Emerald City, and we have seen you
fight the terrible Kalidahs and conquer them, so we know you are the
King of all Beasts."

"It is true," replied the Cowardly Lion; "but I did not come here to
rule the beasts of this forest.  Gugu is King here, and I believe he is
a good King and just and wise.  I come, with my friends, to be the
guest of Gugu, and I hope we are welcome."

That pleased the great Leopard, who said very quickly:

"Yes; you, at least, are welcome to my forest.  But who are these
strangers with you?"

"Dorothy has introduced herself," replied the Lion, "and you are sure
to like her when you know her better.  This man is the Wizard of Oz, a
friend of mine who can do wonderful tricks of magic.  And here is my
true and tried friend, the Hungry Tiger, who lives with me in the
Emerald City."

"Is he ALWAYS hungry?" asked Loo the Unicorn.

"I am," replied the Tiger, answering the question himself.  "I am
always hungry for fat babies."

"Can't you find any fat babies in Oz to eat?" inquired Loo, the Unicorn.

"There are plenty of them, of course," said the Tiger, "but
unfortunately I have such a tender conscience that it won't allow me to
eat babies.  So I'm always hungry for 'em and never can eat 'em,
because my conscience won't let me."

Now of all the surprised beasts in that clearing, not one was so much
surprised at the sudden appearance of these four strangers as Ruggedo
the Nome.  He was frightened, too, for he recognized them as his most
powerful enemies; but he also realized that they could not know he was
the former King of the Nomes, because of the beast's form he wore,
which disguised him so effectually.  So he took courage and resolved
that the Wizard and Dorothy should not defeat his plans.

It was hard to tell, just yet, what the vast assemblage of beasts
thought of the new arrivals.  Some glared angrily at them, but more of
them seemed to be curious and wondering.  All were interested, however,
and they kept very quiet and listened carefully to all that was said.

Kiki Aru, who had remained unnoticed in the shadow of the rock, was at
first more alarmed by the coming of the strangers than even Ruggedo
was, and the boy told himself that unless he acted quickly and without
waiting to ask the advice of the old Nome, their conspiracy was likely
to be discovered and all their plans to conquer and rule Oz be
defeated.  Kiki didn't like the way Ruggedo acted either, for the
former King of the Nomes wanted to do everything his own way, and made
the boy, who alone possessed the power of transformations, obey his
orders as if he were a slave.

Another thing that disturbed Kiki Aru was the fact that a real Wizard
had arrived, who was said to possess many magical powers, and this
Wizard carried his tools in a black bag, and was the friend of the Oz
people, and so would probably try to prevent war between the beasts of
the forest and the people of Oz.

All these things passed through the mind of the Hyup boy while the
Cowardly Lion and Gugu the King were talking together, and that was why
he now began to do several strange things.

He had found a place, near to the point where he stood, where there was
a deep hollow in the rock, so he put his face into this hollow and
whispered softly, so he would not be heard:

"I want the Wizard of Oz to become a fox--Pyrzqxgl!"

The Wizard, who had stood smilingly beside his friends, suddenly felt
his form change to that of a fox, and his black bag fell to the ground.
Kiki reached out an arm and seized the bag, and the Fox cried as loud
as it could:

"Treason!  There's a traitor here with magic powers!"

Everyone was startled at this cry, and Dorothy, seeing her old friend's
plight, screamed and exclaimed: "Mercy me!"

But the next instant the little girl's form had changed to that of a
lamb with fleecy white wool, and Dorothy was too bewildered to do
anything but look around her in wonder.

The Cowardly Lion's eyes now flashed fire; he crouched low and lashed
the ground with his tail and gazed around to discover who the
treacherous magician might be.  But Kiki, who had kept his face in the
hollow rock, again whispered the magic word, and the great lion
disappeared and in his place stood a little boy dressed in Munchkin
costume.  The little Munchkin boy was as angry as the lion had been,
but he was small and helpless.

Ruggedo the Nome saw what was happening and was afraid Kiki would spoil
all his plans, so he leaned over the rock and shouted: "Stop,
Kiki--stop!"

Kiki would not stop, however.  Instead, he transformed the Nome into a
goose, to Ruggedo's horror and dismay.  But the Hungry Tiger had
witnessed all these transformations, and he was watching to see which
of those present was to blame for them.  When Ruggedo spoke to Kiki,
the Hungry Tiger knew that he was the magician, so he made a sudden
spring and hurled his great body full upon the form of the Li-Mon-Eag
crouching against the rock.  Kiki didn't see the Tiger coming because
his face was still in the hollow, and the heavy body of the tiger bore
him to the earth just as he said "Pyrzqxgl!" for the fifth time.

So now the tiger which was crushing him changed to a rabbit, and
relieved of its weight, Kiki sprang up and, spreading his eagle's
wings, flew into the branches of a tree, where no beast could easily
reach him.  He was not an instant too quick in doing this, for Gugu the
King had crouched on the rock's edge and was about to spring on the boy.

From his tree Kiki transformed Gugu into a fat Gillikin woman, and
laughed aloud to see how the woman pranced with rage, and how
astonished all the beasts were at their King's new shape.

The beasts were frightened, too, fearing they would share the fate of
Gugu, so a stampede began when Rango the Gray Ape sprang into the
forest, and Bru the Bear and Loo the Unicorn followed as quickly as
they could.  The elephants backed into the forest, and all the other
animals, big and little, rushed after them, scattering through the
jungles until the clearing was far behind.  The monkeys scrambled into
the trees and swung themselves from limb to limb, to avoid being
trampled upon by the bigger beasts, and they were so quick that they
distanced all the rest.  A panic of fear seemed to have overtaken the
forest people and they got as far away from the terrible Magician as
they possibly could.

But the transformed ones stayed in the clearing, being so astonished
and bewildered by their new shapes that they could only look at one
another in a dazed and helpless fashion, although each one was greatly
annoyed at the trick that had been played on him.

"Who are you?" the Munchkin boy asked the Rabbit; and "Who are you?"
the Fox asked the Lamb; and "Who are you?" the Rabbit asked the fat
Gillikin woman.

"I'm Dorothy," said the woolly Lamb.

"I'm the Wizard," said the Fox.

"I'm the Cowardly Lion," said the Munchkin boy.

"I'm the Hungry Tiger," said the Rabbit.

"I'm Gugu the King," said the fat Woman.

But when they asked the Goose who he was, Ruggedo the Nome would not
tell them.

"I'm just a Goose," he replied, "and what I was before, I cannot
remember."




13.  The Loss of the Black Bag


Kiki Aru, in the form of the Li-Mon-Eag, had scrambled into the high,
thick branches of the tree, so no one could see him, and there he
opened the Wizard's black bag, which he had carried away in his flight.
He was curious to see what the Wizard's magic tools looked like, and
hoped he could use some of them and so secure more power; but after he
had taken the articles, one by one, from the bag, he had to admit they
were puzzles to him.  For, unless he understood their uses, they were
of no value whatever.  Kiki Aru, the Hyup boy, was no wizard or
magician at all, and could do nothing unusual except to use the Magic
Word he had stolen from his father on Mount Munch.  So he hung the
Wizard's black bag on a branch of the tree and then climbed down to the
lower limbs that he might see what the victims of his transformations
were doing.

They were all on top of the flat rock, talking together in tones so low
that Kiki could not hear what they said.

"This is certainly a misfortune," remarked the Wizard in the Fox's
form, "but our transformations are a sort of enchantment which is very
easy to break--when you know how and have the tools to do it with.  The
tools are in my Black Bag; but where is the Bag?"

No one knew that, for none had seen Kiki Aru fly away with it.

"Let's look and see if we can find it," suggested Dorothy the Lamb.

So they left the rock, and all of them searched the clearing high and
low without finding the Bag of Magic Tools.  The Goose searched as
earnestly as the others, for if he could discover it, he meant to hide
it where the Wizard could never find it, because if the Wizard changed
him back to his proper form, along with the others, he would then be
recognized as Ruggedo the Nome, and they would send him out of the Land
of Oz and so ruin all his hopes of conquest.

Ruggedo was not really sorry, now that he thought about it, that Kiki
had transformed all these Oz folks.  The forest beasts, it was true,
had been so frightened that they would now never consent to be
transformed into men, but Kiki could transform them against their will,
and once they were all in human forms, it would not be impossible to
induce them to conquer the Oz people.

So all was not lost, thought the old Nome, and the best thing for him
to do was to rejoin the Hyup boy who had the secret of the
transformations.  So, having made sure the Wizard's black bag was not
in the clearing, the Goose wandered away through the trees when the
others were not looking, and when out of their hearing, he began
calling, "Kiki Aru!  Kiki Aru!  Quack--quack!  Kiki Aru!"

The Boy and the Woman, the Fox, the Lamb, and the Rabbit, not being
able to find the bag, went back to the rock, all feeling exceedingly
strange.

"Where's the Goose?" asked the Wizard.

"He must have run away," replied Dorothy.  "I wonder who he was?"

"I think," said Gugu the King, who was the fat Woman, "that the Goose
was the stranger who proposed that we make war upon the Oz people.  If
so, his transformation was merely a trick to deceive us, and he has now
gone to join his comrade, that wicked Li-Mon-Eag who obeyed all his
commands."

"What shall we do now?" asked Dorothy.  "Shall we go back to the
Emerald City, as we are, and then visit Glinda the Good and ask her to
break the enchantments?"

"I think so," replied the Wizard Fox.  "And we can take Gugu the King
with us, and have Glinda restore him to his natural shape.  But I hate
to leave my Bag of Magic Tools behind me, for without it I shall lose
much of my power as a Wizard.  Also, if I go back to the Emerald City
in the shape of a Fox, the Oz people will think I'm a poor Wizard and
will lose their respect for me."

"Let us make still another search for your tools," suggested the
Cowardly Lion, "and then, if we fail to find the Black Bag anywhere in
this forest, we must go back home as we are."

"Why did you come here, anyway?" inquired Gugu.

"We wanted to borrow a dozen monkeys, to use on Ozma's birthday,"
explained the Wizard.  "We were going to make them small, and train
them to do tricks, and put them inside Ozma's birthday cake."

"Well," said the Forest King, "you would have to get the consent of
Rango the Gray Ape, to do that.  He commands all the tribes of monkeys."

"I'm afraid it's too late, now," said Dorothy, regretfully.  "It was a
splendid plan, but we've got troubles of our own, and I don't like
being a lamb at all."

"You're nice and fuzzy," said the Cowardly Lion.

"That's nothing," declared Dorothy.  "I've never been 'specially proud
of myself, but I'd rather be the way I was born than anything else in
the whole world."


The Glass Cat, although it had some disagreeable ways and manners,
nevertheless realized that Trot and Cap'n Bill were its friends and so
was quite disturbed at the fix it had gotten them into by leading them
to the Isle of the Magic Flower.  The ruby heart of the Glass Cat was
cold and hard, but still it was a heart, and to have a heart of any
sort is to have some consideration for others.  But the queer
transparent creature didn't want Trot and Cap'n Bill to know it was
sorry for them, and therefore it moved very slowly until it had crossed
the river and was out of sight among the trees of the forest.  Then it
headed straight toward the Emerald City, and trotted so fast that it
was like a crystal streak crossing the valleys and plains.  Being
glass, the cat was tireless, and with no reason to delay its journey,
it reached Ozma's palace in wonderfully quick time.

"Where's the Wizard?" it asked the Pink Kitten, which was curled up in
the sunshine on the lowest step of the palace entrance.

"Don't bother me," lazily answered the Pink Kitten, whose name was
Eureka.

"I must find the Wizard at once!" said the Glass Cat.

"Then find him," advised Eureka, and went to sleep again.

The Glass Cat darted up the stairway and came upon Toto, Dorothy's
little black dog.

"Where's the Wizard?" asked the Cat.

"Gone on a journey with Dorothy," replied Toto.

"When did they go, and where have they gone?" demanded the Cat.

"They went yesterday, and I heard them say they would go to the Great
Forest in the Munchkin Country."

"Dear me," said the Glass Cat; "that is a long journey."

"But they rode on the Hungry Tiger and the Cowardly Lion," explained
Toto, "and the Wizard carried his Black Bag of Magic Tools."

The Glass Cat knew the Great Forest of Gugu well, for it had traveled
through this forest many times in its journeys through the Land of Oz.
And it reflected that the Forest of Gugu was nearer to the Isle of the
Magic Flower than the Emerald City was, and so, if it could manage to
find the Wizard, it could lead him across the Gillikin Country to where
Trot and Cap'n Bill were prisoned.  It was a wild country and little
traveled, but the Glass Cat knew every path.  So very little time need
be lost, after all.

Without stopping to ask any more questions the Cat darted out of the
palace and away from the Emerald City, taking the most direct route to
the Forest of Gugu.  Again the creature flashed through the country
like a streak of light, and it would surprise you to know how quickly
it reached the edge of the Great Forest.

There were no monkey guards among the trees to cry out a warning, and
this was so unusual that it astonished the Glass Cat.  Going farther
into the forest it presently came upon a wolf, which at first bounded
away in terror.  But then, seeing it was only a Glass Cat, the Wolf
stopped, and the Cat could see it was trembling, as if from a terrible
fright.

"What's the matter?" asked the Cat.

"A dreadful Magician has come among us!" exclaimed the Wolf, "and he's
changing the forms of all the beasts--quick as a wink--and making them
all his slaves."

The Glass Cat smiled and said:

"Why, that's only the Wizard of Oz.  He may be having some fun with you
forest people, but the Wizard wouldn't hurt a beast for anything."

"I don't mean the Wizard," explained the Wolf.  "And if the Wizard of
Oz is that funny little man who rode a great Tiger into the clearing,
he's been transformed himself by the terrible Magician."

"The Wizard transformed?  Why, that's impossible," declared the Glass
Cat.

"No; it isn't.  I saw him with my own eyes, changed into the form of a
Fox, and the girl who was with him was changed to a woolly Lamb."

The Glass Cat was indeed surprised.

"When did that happen?" it asked.

"Just a little while ago in the clearing.  All the animals had met
there, but they ran away when the Magician began his transformations,
and I'm thankful I escaped with my natural shape.  But I'm still
afraid, and I'm going somewhere to hide."

With this the Wolf ran on, and the Glass Cat, which knew where the big
clearing was, went toward it.  But now it walked more slowly, and its
pink brains rolled and tumbled around at a great rate because it was
thinking over the amazing news the Wolf had told it.

When the Glass Cat reached the clearing, it saw a Fox, a Lamb, a
Rabbit, a Munchkin boy and a fat Gillikin woman, all wandering around
in an aimless sort of way, for they were again searching for the Black
Bag of Magic Tools.

The Cat watched them a moment and then it walked slowly into the open
space.  At once the Lamb ran toward it, crying:

"Oh, Wizard, here's the Glass Cat!"

"Where, Dorothy?" asked the Fox.

"Here!"

The Boy and the Woman and the Rabbit now joined the Fox and the Lamb,
and they all stood before the Glass Cat and speaking together, almost
like a chorus, asked: "Have you seen the Black Bag?"

"Often," replied the Glass Cat, "but not lately."

"It's lost," said the Fox, "and we must find it."

"Are you the Wizard?" asked the Cat.

"Yes."

"And who are these others?"

"I'm Dorothy," said the Lamb.

"I'm the Cowardly Lion," said the Munchkin boy.

"I'm the Hungry Tiger," said the Rabbit.

"I'm Gugu, King of the Forest," said the fat Woman.

The Glass Cat sat on its hind legs and began to laugh.  "My, what a
funny lot!" exclaimed the Creature.  "Who played this joke on you?"

"It's no joke at all," declared the Wizard.  "It was a cruel, wicked
transformation, and the Magician that did it has the head of a lion,
the body of a monkey, the wings of an eagle and a round ball on the end
of his tail."

The Glass Cat laughed again.  "That Magician must look funnier than you
do," it said.  "Where is he now?"

"Somewhere in the forest," said the Cowardly Lion.  "He just jumped
into that tall maple tree over there, for he can climb like a monkey
and fly like an eagle, and then he disappeared in the forest."

"And there was another Magician, just like him, who was his friend,"
added Dorothy, "but they probably quarreled, for the wickedest one
changed his friend into the form of a Goose."

"What became of the Goose?" asked the Cat, looking around.

"He must have gone away to find his friend," answered Gugu the King.
"But a Goose can't travel very fast, so we could easily find him if we
wanted to."

"The worst thing of all," said the Wizard, "is that my Black Bag is
lost.  It disappeared when I was transformed.  If I could find it I
could easily break these enchantments by means of my magic, and we
would resume our own forms again.  Will you help us search for the
Black Bag, Friend Cat?"

"Of course," replied the Glass Cat.  "But I expect the strange Magician
carried it away with him.  If he's a magician, he knows you need that
Bag, and perhaps he's afraid of your magic.  So he's probably taken the
Bag with him, and you won't see it again unless you find the Magician."

"That sounds reasonable," remarked the Lamb, which was Dorothy.  "Those
pink brains of yours seem to be working pretty well to-day."

"If the Glass Cat is right," said the Wizard in a solemn voice,
"there's more trouble ahead of us.  That Magician is dangerous, and if
we go near him he may transform us into shapes not as nice as these."

"I don't see how we could be any WORSE off," growled Gugu, who was
indignant because he was forced to appear in the form of a fat woman.

"Anyway," said the Cowardly Lion, "our best plan is to find the
Magician and try to get the Black Bag from him.  We may manage to steal
it, or perhaps we can argue him into giving it to us."

"Why not find the Goose, first?" asked Dorothy.  "The Goose will be
angry at the Magician, and he may be able to help us."

"That isn't a bad idea," returned the Wizard.  "Come on, Friends; let's
find that Goose.  We will separate and search in different directions,
and the first to find the Goose must bring him here, where we will all
meet again in an hour."




14.  The Wizard Learns the Magic Word


Now, the Goose was the transformation of old Ruggedo, who was at one
time King of the Nomes, and he was even more angry at Kiki Aru than
were the others who shapes had been changed.  The Nome detested
anything in the way of a bird, because birds lay eggs and eggs are
feared by all the Nomes more than anything else in the world.  A goose
is a foolish bird, too, and Ruggedo was dreadfully ashamed of the shape
he was forced to wear.  And it would make him shudder to reflect that
the Goose might lay an egg!

So the Nome was afraid of himself and afraid of everything around him.
If an egg touched him he could then be destroyed, and almost any animal
he met in the forest might easily conquer him.  And that would be the
end of old Ruggedo the Nome.

Aside from these fears, however, he was filled with anger against Kiki,
whom he had meant to trap by cleverly stealing from him the Magic Word.
The boy must have been crazy to spoil everything the way he did, but
Ruggedo knew that the arrival of the Wizard had scared Kiki, and he was
not sorry the boy had transformed the Wizard and Dorothy and made them
helpless.  It was his own transformation that annoyed him and made him
indignant, so he ran about the forest hunting for Kiki, so that he
might get a better shape and coax the boy to follow his plans to
conquer the Land of Oz.

Kiki Aru hadn't gone very far away, for he had surprised himself as
well as the others by the quick transformations and was puzzled as to
what to do next.  Ruggedo the Nome was overbearing and tricky, and Kiki
knew he was not to be depended on; but the Nome could plan and plot,
which the Hyup boy was not wise enough to do, and so, when he looked
down through the branches of a tree and saw a Goose waddling along
below and heard it cry out, "Kiki Aru!  Quack--quack!  Kiki Aru!" the
boy answered in a low voice, "Here I am," and swung himself down to the
lowest limb of the tree.

The Goose looked up and saw him.

"You've bungled things in a dreadful way!" exclaimed the Goose.  "Why
did you do it?"

"Because I wanted to," answered Kiki.  "You acted as if I was your
slave, and I wanted to show these forest people that I am more powerful
than you."

The Goose hissed softly, but Kiki did not hear that.

Old Ruggedo quickly recovered his wits and muttered to himself: "This
boy is the goose, although it is I who wear the goose's shape.  I will
be gentle with him now, and fierce with him when I have him in my
power."  Then he said aloud to Kiki:

"Well, hereafter I will be content to acknowledge you the master.  You
bungled things, as I said, but we can still conquer Oz."

"How?" asked the boy.

"First give me back the shape of the Li-Mon-Eag, and then we can talk
together more conveniently," suggested the Nome.

"Wait a moment, then," said Kiki, and climbed higher up the tree.
There he whispered the Magic Word and the Goose became a Li-Mon-Eag, as
he had been before.

"Good!" said the Nome, well pleased, as Kiki joined him by dropping
down from the tree.  "Now let us find a quiet place where we can talk
without being overheard by the beasts."

So the two started away and crossed the forest until they came to a
place where the trees were not so tall nor so close together, and among
these scattered trees was another clearing, not so large as the first
one, where the meeting of the beasts had been held.  Standing on the
edge of this clearing and looking across it, they saw the trees on the
farther side full of monkeys, who were chattering together at a great
rate of the sights they had witnessed at the meeting.

The old Nome whispered to Kiki not to enter the clearing or allow the
monkeys to see them.

"Why not?" asked the boy, drawing back.

"Because those monkeys are to be our army--the army which will conquer
Oz," said the Nome.  "Sit down here with me, Kiki, and keep quiet, and
I will explain to you my plan."

Now, neither Kiki Aru nor Ruggedo had noticed that a sly Fox had
followed them all the way from the tree where the Goose had been
transformed to the Li-Mon-Eag.  Indeed, this Fox, who was none other
than the Wizard of Oz, had witnessed the transformation of the Goose
and now decided he would keep watch on the conspirators and see what
they would do next.

A Fox can move through a forest very softly, without making any noise,
and so the Wizard's enemies did not suspect his presence.  But when
they sat down by the edge of the clearing, to talk, with their backs
toward him, the Wizard did not know whether to risk being seen, by
creeping closer to hear what they said, or whether it would be better
for him to hide himself until they moved on again.

While he considered this question he discovered near him a great tree
which had a hollow trunk, and there was a round hole in this tree,
about three feet above the ground.  The Wizard Fox decided it would be
safer for him to hide inside the hollow tree, so he sprang into the
hole and crouched down in the hollow, so that his eyes just came to the
edge of the hole by which he had entered, and from here he watched the
forms of the two Li-Mon-Eags.

"This is my plan," said the Nome to Kiki, speaking so low that the
Wizard could only hear the rumble of his voice.  "Since you can
transform anything into any form you wish, we will transform these
monkeys into an army, and with that army we will conquer the Oz people."

"The monkeys won't make much of an army," objected Kiki.

"We need a great army, but not a numerous one," responded the Nome.
"You will transform each monkey into a giant man, dressed in a fine
uniform and armed with a sharp sword.  There are fifty monkeys over
there and fifty giants would make as big an army as we need."

"What will they do with the swords?" asked Kiki.  "Nothing can kill the
Oz people."

"True," said Ruggedo.  "The Oz people cannot be killed, but they can be
cut into small pieces, and while every piece will still be alive, we
can scatter the pieces around so that they will be quite helpless.
Therefore, the Oz people will be afraid of the swords of our army, and
we will conquer them with ease."

"That seems like a good idea," replied the boy, approvingly.  "And in
such a case, we need not bother with the other beasts of the forest."

"No; you have frightened the beasts, and they would no longer consent
to assist us in conquering Oz.  But those monkeys are foolish
creatures, and once they are transformed to Giants, they will do just
as we say and obey our commands.  Can you transform them all at once?"

"No, I must take one at a time," said Kiki.  "But the fifty
transformations can be made in an hour or so.  Stay here, Ruggedo, and
I will change the first monkey--that one at the left, on the end of the
limb--into a Giant with a sword."

"Where are you going?" asked the Nome.

"I must not speak the Magic Word in the presence of another person,"
declared Kiki, who was determined not to allow his treacherous
companion to learn his secret, "so I will go where you cannot hear me."

Ruggedo the Nome was disappointed, but he hoped still to catch the boy
unawares and surprise the Magic Word.  So he merely nodded his lion
head, and Kiki got up and went back into the forest a short distance.
Here he spied a hollow tree, and by chance it was the same hollow tree
in which the Wizard of Oz, now in the form of a Fox, had hidden himself.

As Kiki ran up to the tree the Fox ducked its head, so that it was out
of sight in the dark hollow beneath the hole, and then Kiki put his
face into the hole and whispered: "I want that monkey on the branch at
the left to become a Giant man fifty feet tall, dressed in a uniform
and with a sharp sword--Pyrzqxgl!"

Then he ran back to Ruggedo, but the Wizard Fox had heard quite plainly
every word that he had said.

The monkey was instantly transformed into the Giant, and the Giant was
so big that as he stood on the ground his head was higher than the
trees of the forest.  The monkeys raised a great chatter but did not
seem to understand that the Giant was one of themselves.

"Good!" cried the Nome.  "Hurry, Kiki, and transform the others."

So Kiki rushed back to the tree and putting his face to the hollow,
whispered:

"I want the next monkey to be just like the first--Pyrzqxgl!"

Again the Wizard Fox heard the Magic Word, and just how it was
pronounced.  But he sat still in the hollow and waited to hear it
again, so it would be impressed on his mind and he would not forget it.

Kiki kept running to the edge of the forest and back to the hollow tree
again until he had whispered the Magic Word six times and six monkeys
had been changed to six great Giants.  Then the Wizard decided he would
make an experiment and use the Magic Word himself.  So, while Kiki was
running back to the Nome, the Fox stuck his head out of the hollow and
said softly: "I want that creature who is running to become a
hickory-nut--Pyrzqxgl!"

Instantly the Li-Mon-Eag form of Kiki Aru the Hyup disappeared and a
small hickory-nut rolled upon the ground a moment and then lay still.

The Wizard was delighted, and leaped from the hollow just as Ruggedo
looked around to see what had become of Kiki.  The Nome saw the Fox but
no Kiki, so he hastily rose to his feet.  The Wizard did not know how
powerful the queer beast might be, so he resolved to take no chances.

"I want this creature to become a walnut--Pyrzqxgl!" he said aloud.
But he did not pronounce the Magic Word in quite the right way, and
Ruggedo's form did not change.  But the Nome knew at once that
"Pyrzqxgl!" was the Magic Word, so he rushed at the Fox and cried:

"I want you to become a Goose--Pyrzqxgl!"

But the Nome did not pronounce the word aright, either, having never
heard it spoken but once before, and then with a wrong accent.  So the
Fox was not transformed, but it had to run away to escape being caught
by the angry Nome.

Ruggedo now began pronouncing the Magic Word in every way he could
think of, hoping to hit the right one, and the Fox, hiding in a bush,
was somewhat troubled by the fear that he might succeed.  However, the
Wizard, who was used to magic arts, remained calm and soon remembered
exactly how Kiki Aru had pronounced the word.  So he repeated the
sentence he had before uttered and Ruggedo the Nome became an ordinary
walnut.

The Wizard now crept out from the bush and said: "I want my own form
again--Pyrzqxgl!"

Instantly he was the Wizard of Oz, and after picking up the hickory-nut
and the walnut, and carefully placing them in his pocket, he ran back
to the big clearing.

Dorothy the Lamb uttered a bleat of delight when she saw her old friend
restored to his natural shape.  The others were all there, not having
found the Goose.  The fat Gillikin woman, the Munchkin boy, the Rabbit
and the Glass Cat crowded around the Wizard and asked what had happened.

Before he explained anything of his adventure, he transformed them
all--except, of course, the Glass Cat--into their natural shapes, and
when their joy permitted them to quiet somewhat, he told how he had by
chance surprised the Magician's secret and been able to change the two
Li-Mon-Eags into shapes that could not speak, and therefore would be
unable to help themselves.  And the little Wizard showed his astonished
friends the hickory-nut and the walnut to prove that he had spoken the
truth.

"But--see here!"--exclaimed Dorothy.  "What has become of those Giant
Soldiers who used to be monkeys?"

"I forgot all about them!" admitted the Wizard; "but I suppose they are
still standing there in the forest."




15.  The Lonesome Duck


Trot and Cap'n Bill stood before the Magic Flower, actually rooted to
the spot.

"Aren't you hungry, Cap'n?" asked the little girl, with a long sigh,
for she had been standing there for hours and hours.

"Well," replied the sailor-man, "I ain't sayin' as I couldn't EAT,
Trot--if a dinner was handy--but I guess old folks don't get as hungry
as young folks do."

"I'm not sure 'bout that, Cap'n Bill," she said thoughtfully.  "Age
MIGHT make a diff'rence, but seems to me SIZE would make a bigger
diff'rence.  Seeing you're twice as big as me, you ought to be twice as
hungry."

"I hope I am," he rejoined, "for I can stand it a while longer.  I do
hope the Glass Cat will hurry, and I hope the Wizard won't waste time
a-comin' to us."

Trot sighed again and watched the wonderful Magic Flower, because there
was nothing else to do.  Just now a lovely group of pink peonies budded
and bloomed, but soon they faded away, and a mass of deep blue lilies
took their place.  Then some yellow chrysanthemums blossomed on the
plant, and when they had opened all their petals and reached
perfection, they gave way to a lot of white floral balls spotted with
crimson--a flower Trot had never seen before.

"But I get awful tired watchin' flowers an' flowers an' flowers," she
said impatiently.

"They're might pretty," observed Cap'n Bill.

"I know; and if a person could come and look at the Magic Flower just
when she felt like it, it would be a fine thing, but to HAVE TO stand
and watch it, whether you want to or not, isn't so much fun.  I wish,
Cap'n Bill, the thing would grow fruit for a while instead of flowers."

Scarcely had she spoken when the white balls with crimson spots faded
away and a lot of beautiful ripe peaches took their place.  With a cry
of mingled surprise and delight Trot reached out and plucked a peach
from the bush and began to eat it, finding it delicious.  Cap'n Bill
was somewhat dazed at the girl's wish being granted so quickly, so
before he could pick a peach they had faded away and bananas took their
place.  "Grab one, Cap'n!" exclaimed Trot, and even while eating the
peach she seized a banana with her other hand and tore it from the bush.

The old sailor was still bewildered.  He put out a hand indeed, but he
was too late, for now the bananas disappeared and lemons took their
place.

"Pshaw!" cried Trot.  "You can't eat those things; but watch out,
Cap'n, for something else."

Cocoanuts next appeared, but Cap'n Bill shook his head.

"Ca'n't crack 'em," he remarked, "'cause we haven't anything handy to
smash 'em with."

"Well, take one, anyhow," advised Trot; but the cocoanuts were gone
now, and a deep, purple, pear-shaped fruit which was unknown to them
took their place.  Again Cap'n Bill hesitated, and Trot said to him:

"You ought to have captured a peach and a banana, as I did.  If you're
not careful, Cap'n, you'll miss all your chances.  Here, I'll divide my
banana with you."

Even as she spoke, the Magic Plant was covered with big red apples,
growing on every branch, and Cap'n Bill hesitated no longer.  He
grabbed with both hands and picked two apples, while Trot had only time
to secure one before they were gone.

"It's curious," remarked the sailor, munching his apple, "how these
fruits keep good when you've picked 'em, but dis'pear inter thin air if
they're left on the bush."

"The whole thing is curious," declared the girl, "and it couldn't exist
in any country but this, where magic is so common.  Those are limes.
Don't pick 'em, for they'd pucker up your mouth and--Ooo! here come
plums!" and she tucked her apple in her apron pocket and captured three
plums--each one almost as big as an egg--before they disappeared.
Cap'n Bill got some too, but both were too hungry to fast any longer,
so they began eating their apples and plums and let the magic bush bear
all sorts of fruits, one after another.  The Cap'n stopped once to pick
a fine cantaloupe, which he held under his arm, and Trot, having
finished her plums, got a handful of cherries and an orange; but when
almost every sort of fruit had appeared on the bush, the crop ceased
and only flowers, as before, bloomed upon it.

"I wonder why it changed back," mused Trot, who was not worried because
she had enough fruit to satisfy her hunger.

"Well, you only wished it would bear fruit 'for a while,'" said the
sailor, "and it did.  P'raps if you'd said 'forever,' Trot, it would
have always been fruit."

"But why should MY wish be obeyed?" asked the girl.  "I'm not a fairy
or a wizard or any kind of a magic-maker."

"I guess," replied Cap'n Bill, "that this little island is a magic
island, and any folks on it can tell the bush what to produce, an'
it'll produce it."

"Do you think I could wish for anything else, Cap'n and get it?" she
inquired anxiously.

"What are you thinkin' of, Trot?"

"I'm thinking of wishing that these roots on our feet would disappear,
and let us free."

"Try it, Trot."

So she tried it, and the wish had no effect whatever.

"Try it yourself, Cap'n," she suggested.

Then Cap'n Bill made the wish to be free, with no better result.

"No," said he, "it's no use; the wishes only affect the Magic Plant;
but I'm glad we can make it bear fruit, 'cause now we know we won't
starve before the Wizard gets to us."

"But I'm gett'n' tired standing here so long," complained the girl.
"If I could only lift one foot, and rest it, I'd feel better."

"Same with me, Trot.  I've noticed that if you've got to do a thing,
and can't help yourself, it gets to be a hardship mighty quick."

"Folks that can raise their feet don't appreciate what a blessing it
is," said Trot thoughtfully.  "I never knew before what fun it is to
raise one foot, an' then another, any time you feel like it."

"There's lots o' things folks don't 'preciate," replied the sailor-man.
"If somethin' would 'most stop your breath, you'd think breathin' easy
was the finest thing in life.  When a person's well, he don't realize
how jolly it is, but when he gets sick he 'members the time he was
well, an' wishes that time would come back.  Most folks forget to thank
God for givin' 'em two good legs, till they lose one o' 'em, like I
did; and then it's too late, 'cept to praise God for leavin' one."

"Your wooden leg ain't so bad, Cap'n," she remarked, looking at it
critically.  "Anyhow, it don't take root on a Magic Island, like our
meat legs do."

"I ain't complainin'," said Cap'n Bill.  "What's that swimmin' towards
us, Trot?" he added, looking over the Magic Flower and across the water.

The girl looked, too, and then she replied.

"It's a bird of some sort.  It's like a duck, only I never saw a duck
have so many colors."

The bird swam swiftly and gracefully toward the Magic Isle, and as it
drew nearer its gorgeously colored plumage astonished them.  The
feathers were of many hues of glistening greens and blues and purples,
and it had a yellow head with a red plume, and pink, white and violet
in its tail.  When it reached the Isle, it came ashore and approached
them, waddling slowly and turning its head first to one side and then
to the other, so as to see the girl and the sailor better.

"You're strangers," said the bird, coming to a halt near them, "and
you've been caught by the Magic Isle and made prisoners."

"Yes," returned Trot, with a sigh; "we're rooted.  But I hope we won't
grow."

"You'll grow small," said the Bird.  "You'll keep growing smaller every
day, until bye and bye there'll be nothing left of you.  That's the
usual way, on this Magic Isle."

"How do you know about it, and who are you, anyhow?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"I'm the Lonesome Duck," replied the bird.  "I suppose you've heard of
me?"

"No," said Trot, "I can't say I have.  What makes you lonesome?"

"Why, I haven't any family or any relations," returned the Duck.

"Haven't you any friends?"

"Not a friend.  And I've nothing to do.  I've lived a long time, and
I've got to live forever, because I belong in the Land of Oz, where no
living thing dies.  Think of existing year after year, with no friends,
no family, and nothing to do!  Can you wonder I'm lonesome?"

"Why don't you make a few friends, and find something to do?" inquired
Cap'n Bill.

"I can't make friends because everyone I meet--bird, beast, or
person--is disagreeable to me.  In a few minutes I shall be unable to
bear your society longer, and then I'll go away and leave you," said
the Lonesome Duck.  "And, as for doing anything, there's no use in it.
All I meet are doing something, so I have decided it's common and
uninteresting and I prefer to remain lonesome."

"Don't you have to hunt for your food?" asked Trot.

"No.  In my diamond palace, a little way up the river, food is
magically supplied me; but I seldom eat, because it is so common."

"You must be a Magician Duck," remarked Cap'n Bill.

"Why so?"

"Well, ordinary ducks don't have diamond palaces an' magic food, like
you do."

"True; and that's another reason why I'm lonesome.  You must remember
I'm the only Duck in the Land of Oz, and I'm not like any other duck in
the outside world."

"Seems to me you LIKE bein' lonesome," observed Cap'n Bill.

"I can't say I like it, exactly," replied the Duck, "but since it seems
to be my fate, I'm rather proud of it."

"How do you s'pose a single, solitary Duck happened to be in the Land
of Oz?" asked Trot, wonderingly.

"I used to know the reason, many years ago, but I've quite forgotten
it," declared the Duck.  "The reason for a thing is never so important
as the thing itself, so there's no use remembering anything but the
fact that I'm lonesome."

"I guess you'd be happier if you tried to do something," asserted Trot.
"If you can't do anything for yourself, you can do things for others,
and then you'd get lots of friends and stop being lonesome."

"Now you're getting disagreeable," said the Lonesome Duck, "and I shall
have to go and leave you."

"Can't you help us any," pleaded the girl.  "If there's anything magic
about you, you might get us out of this scrape."

"I haven't any magic strong enough to get you off the Magic Isle,"
replied the Lonesome Duck.  "What magic I possess is very simple, but I
find it enough for my own needs."

"If we could only sit down a while, we could stand it better," said
Trot, "but we have nothing to sit on."

"Then you will have to stand it," said the Lonesome Duck.

"P'raps you've enough magic to give us a couple of stools," suggested
Cap'n Bill.

"A duck isn't supposed to know what stools are," was the reply.

"But you're diff'rent from all other ducks."

"That is true."  The strange creature seemed to reflect for a moment,
looking at them sharply from its round black eyes.  Then it said:
"Sometimes, when the sun is hot, I grow a toadstool to shelter me from
its rays.  Perhaps you could sit on toadstools."

"Well, if they were strong enough, they'd do," answered Cap'n Bill.

"Then, before I do I'll give you a couple," said the Lonesome Duck, and
began waddling about in a small circle.  It went around the circle to
the right three times, and then it went around to the left three times.
Then it hopped backward three times and forward three times.

"What are you doing?" asked Trot.

"Don't interrupt.  This is an incantation," replied the Lonesome Duck,
but now it began making a succession of soft noises that sounded like
quacks and seemed to mean nothing at all.  And it kept up these sounds
so long that Trot finally exclaimed:

"Can't you hurry up and finish that 'cantation?  If it takes all summer
to make a couple of toadstools, you're not much of a magician."

"I told you not to interrupt," said the Lonesome Duck, sternly.  "If
you get TOO disagreeable, you'll drive me away before I finish this
incantation."

Trot kept quiet, after the rebuke, and the Duck resumed the quacky
muttering.  Cap'n Bill chuckled a little to himself and remarked to
Trot in a whisper: "For a bird that ain't got anything to do, this
Lonesome Duck is makin' consider'ble fuss.  An' I ain't sure, after
all, as toadstools would be worth sittin' on."

Even as he spoke, the sailor-man felt something touch him from behind
and, turning his head, he found a big toadstool in just the right place
and of just the right size to sit upon.  There was one behind Trot,
too, and with a cry of pleasure the little girl sank back upon it and
found it a very comfortable seat--solid, yet almost like a cushion.
Even Cap'n Bill's weight did not break his toadstool down, and when
both were seated, they found that the Lonesome Duck had waddled away
and was now at the water's edge.

"Thank you, ever so much!" cried Trot, and the sailor called out: "Much
obliged!"

But the Lonesome Duck paid no attention.  Without even looking in their
direction again, the gaudy fowl entered the water and swam gracefully
away.




16.  The Glass Cat Finds the Black Bag


When the six monkeys were transformed by Kiki Aru into six giant
soldiers fifty feet tall, their heads came above the top of the trees,
which in this part of the forest were not so high as in some other
parts; and, although the trees were somewhat scattered, the bodies of
the giant soldiers were so big that they quite filled the spaces in
which they stood and the branches pressed them on every side.

Of course, Kiki was foolish to have made his soldiers so big, for now
they could not get out of the forest.  Indeed, they could not stir a
step, but were imprisoned by the trees.  Even had they been in the
little clearing they could not have made their way out of it, but they
were a little beyond the clearing.  At first, the other monkeys who had
not been enchanted were afraid of the soldiers, and hastily quitted the
place; but soon finding that the great men stood stock still, although
grunting indignantly at their transformation, the band of monkeys
returned to the spot and looked at them curiously, not guessing that
they were really monkeys and their own friends.

The soldiers couldn't see them, their heads being above the trees; they
could not even raise their arms or draw their sharp swords, so closely
were they held by the leafy branches.  So the monkeys, finding the
giants helpless, began climbing up their bodies, and presently all the
band were perched on the shoulders of the giants and peering into their
faces.

"I'm Ebu, your father," cried one soldier to a monkey who had perched
upon his left ear, "but some cruel person has enchanted me."

"I'm your Uncle Peeker," said another soldier to another monkey.

So, very soon all the monkeys knew the truth and were sorry for their
friends and relations and angry at the person--whoever it was--who had
transformed them.  There was a great chattering among the tree-tops,
and the noise attracted other monkeys, so that the clearing and all the
trees around were full of them.

Rango the Gray Ape, who was the Chief of all the monkey tribes of the
forest, heard the uproar and came to see what was wrong with his
people.  And Rango, being wiser and more experienced, at once knew that
the strange magician who looked like a mixed-up beast was responsible
for the transformations.  He realized that the six giant soldiers were
helpless prisoners, because of their size, and knew he was powerless to
release them.  So, although he feared to meet the terrible magician, he
hurried away to the Great Clearing to tell Gugu the King what had
happened and to try to find the Wizard of Oz and get him to save his
six enchanted subjects.

Rango darted into the Great Clearing just as the Wizard had restored
all the enchanted ones around him to their proper shapes, and the Gray
Ape was glad to hear that the wicked magician-beast had been conquered.

"But now, O mighty Wizard, you must come with me to where six of my
people are transformed into six great giant men," he said, "for if they
are allowed to remain there, their happiness and their future lives
will be ruined."

The Wizard did not reply at once, for he was thinking this a good
opportunity to win Rango's consent to his taking some monkeys to the
Emerald City for Ozma's birthday cake.

"It is a great thing you ask of me, O Rango the Gray Ape," said he,
"for the bigger the giants are the more powerful their enchantment, and
the more difficult it will be to restore them to their natural forms.
However, I will think it over."

Then the Wizard went to another part of the clearing and sat on a log
and appeared to be in deep thought.

The Glass Cat had been greatly interested in the Gray Ape's story and
was curious to see what the giant soldiers looked like.  Hearing that
their heads extended above the tree-tops, the Glass Cat decided that if
it climbed the tall avocado tree that stood at the side of the
clearing, it might be able to see the giants' heads.  So, without
mentioning her errand, the crystal creature went to the tree and, by
sticking her sharp glass claws in the bark, easily climbed the tree to
its very top and, looking over the forest, saw the six giant heads,
although they were now a long way off.  It was, indeed, a remarkable
sight, for the huge heads had immense soldier caps on them, with red
and yellow plumes and looked very fierce and terrible, although the
monkey hearts of the giants were at that moment filled with fear.

Having satisfied her curiosity, the Glass Cat began to climb down from
the tree more slowly.  Suddenly she discerned the Wizard's black bag
hanging from a limb of the tree.  She grasped the black bag in her
glass teeth, and although it was rather heavy for so small an animal,
managed to get it free and to carry it safely down to the ground.  Then
she looked around for the Wizard and seeing him seated upon the stump
she hid the black bag among some leaves and then went over to where the
Wizard sat.

"I forgot to tell you," said the Glass Cat, "that Trot and Cap'n Bill
are in trouble, and I came here to hunt you up and get you to go and
rescue them."

"Good gracious, Cat!  Why didn't you tell me before?" exclaimed the
Wizard.

"For the reason that I found so much excitement here that I forgot Trot
and Cap'n Bill."

"What's wrong with them?" asked the Wizard.

Then the Glass Cat explained how they had gone to get the Magic Flower
for Ozma's birthday gift and had been trapped by the magic of the queer
island.  The Wizard was really alarmed, but he shook his head and said
sadly:

"I'm afraid I can't help my dear friends, because I've lost my black
bag."

"If I find it, will you go to them?" asked the creature.

"Of course," replied the Wizard.  "But I do not think that a Glass Cat
with nothing but pink brains can succeed when all the rest of us have
failed."

"Don't you admire my pink brains?" demanded the Cat.

"They're pretty," admitted the Wizard, "but they're not regular brains,
you know, and so we don't expect them to amount to much."

"But if I find your black bag--and find it inside of five minutes--will
you admit my pink brains are better than your common human brains?"

"Well, I'll admit they're better HUNTERS," said the Wizard,
reluctantly, "but you can't do it.  We've searched everywhere, and the
black bag isn't to be found."

"That shows how much you know!" retorted the Glass Cat, scornfully.
"Watch my brains a minute, and see them whirl around."

The Wizard watched, for he was anxious to regain his black bag, and the
pink brains really did whirl around in a remarkable manner.

"Now, come with me," commanded the Glass Cat, and led the Wizard
straight to the spot where it had covered the bag with leaves.
"According to my brains," said the creature, "your black bag ought to
be here."

Then it scratched at the leaves and uncovered the bag, which the Wizard
promptly seized with a cry of delight.  Now that he had regained his
Magic Tools, he felt confident he could rescue Trot and Cap'n Bill.

Rango the Gray Ape was getting impatient.  He now approached the Wizard
and said:

"Well, what do you intend to do about those poor enchanted monkeys?"

"I'll make a bargain with you, Rango," replied the little man.  "If you
will let me take a dozen of your monkeys to the Emerald City, and keep
them until after Ozma's birthday, I'll break the enchantment of the six
Giant Soldiers and return them to their natural forms."

But the Gray Ape shook his head.

"I can't do it," he declared.  "The monkeys would be very lonesome and
unhappy in the Emerald City and your people would tease them and throw
stones at them, which would cause them to fight and bite."

"The people won't see them till Ozma's birthday dinner," promised the
Wizard.  "I'll make them very small--about four inches high, and I'll
keep them in a pretty cage in my own room, where they will be safe from
harm.  I'll feed them the nicest kind of food, train them to do some
clever tricks, and on Ozma's birthday I'll hide the twelve little
monkeys inside a cake.  When Ozma cuts the cake the monkeys will jump
out on to the table and do their tricks.  The next day I will bring
them back to the forest and make them big as ever, and they'll have
some exciting stories to tell their friends.  What do you say, Rango?"

"I say no!" answered the Gray Ape.  "I won't have my monkeys enchanted
and made to do tricks for the Oz people."

"Very well," said the Wizard calmly; "then I'll go.  Come, Dorothy," he
called to the little girl, "let's start on our journey."

"Aren't you going to save those six monkeys who are giant soldiers?"
asked Rango, anxiously.

"Why should I?" returned the Wizard.  "If you will not do me the favor
I ask, you cannot expect me to favor you."

"Wait a minute," said the Gray Ape.  "I've changed my mind.  If you
will treat the twelve monkeys nicely and bring them safely back to the
forest, I'll let you take them."

"Thank you," replied the Wizard, cheerfully.  "We'll go at once and
save those giant soldiers."

So all the party left the clearing and proceeded to the place where the
giants still stood among the trees.  Hundreds of monkeys, apes, baboons
and orangoutangs had gathered round, and their wild chatter could be
heard a mile away.  But the Gray Ape soon hushed the babel of sounds,
and the Wizard lost no time in breaking the enchantments.  First one
and then another giant soldier disappeared and became an ordinary
monkey again, and the six were shortly returned to their friends in
their proper forms.

This action made the Wizard very popular with the great army of
monkeys, and when the Gray Ape announced that the Wizard wanted to
borrow twelve monkeys to take to the Emerald City for a couple of
weeks, and asked for volunteers, nearly a hundred offered to go, so
great was their confidence in the little man who had saved their
comrades.

The Wizard selected a dozen that  seemed intelligent and good-tempered,
and then he opened his black bag and took out a queerly shaped dish
that was silver on the outside and gold on the inside.  Into this dish
he poured a powder and set fire to it.  It made a thick smoke that
quite enveloped the twelve monkeys, as well as the form of the Wizard,
but when the smoke cleared away the dish had been changed to a golden
cage with silver bars, and the twelve monkeys had become about three
inches high and were all seated comfortably inside the cage.

The thousands of hairy animals who had witnessed this act of magic were
much astonished and applauded the Wizard by barking aloud and shaking
the limbs of the trees in which they sat.  Dorothy said: "That was a
fine trick, Wizard!" and the Gray Ape remarked: "You are certainly the
most wonderful magician in all the Land of Oz!"

"Oh, no," modestly replied the little man.  "Glinda's magic is better
than mine, but mine seems good enough to use on ordinary occasions.
And now, Rango, we will say good-bye, and I promise to return your
monkeys as happy and safe as they are now."

The Wizard rode on the back of the Hungry Tiger and carried the cage of
monkeys very carefully, so as not to joggle them.  Dorothy rode on the
back of the Cowardly Lion, and the Glass Cat trotted, as before, to
show them the way.

Gugu the King crouched upon a log and watched them go, but as he bade
them farewell, the enormous Leopard said:

"I know now that you are the friends of beasts and that the forest
people may trust you.  Whenever the Wizard of Oz and Princess Dorothy
enter the Forest of Gugu hereafter, they will be as welcome and as safe
with us as ever they are in the Emerald City."




17.  A Remarkable Journey


"You see," explained the Glass Cat, "that Magic Isle where Trot and
Cap'n Bill are stuck is also in this Gillikin Country--over at the east
side of it, and it's no farther to go across-lots from here than it is
from here to the Emerald City.  So we'll save time by cutting across
the mountains."

"Are you sure you know the way?" asked Dorothy.

"I know all the Land of Oz better than any other living creature knows
it," asserted the Glass Cat.

"Go ahead, then, and guide us," said the Wizard.  "We've left our poor
friends helpless too long already, and the sooner we rescue them the
happier they'll be."

"Are you sure you can get 'em out of their fix?" the little girl
inquired.

"I've no doubt of it," the Wizard assured her.  "But I can't tell what
sort of magic I must use until I get to the place and discover just how
they are enchanted."

"I've heard of that Magic Isle where the Wonderful Flower grows,"
remarked the Cowardly Lion.  "Long ago, when I used to live in the
forests, the beasts told stories about the Isle and how the Magic
Flower was placed there to entrap strangers--men or beasts."

"Is the Flower really wonderful?" questioned Dorothy.

"I have heard it is the most beautiful plant in the world," answered
the Lion.  "I have never seen it myself, but friendly beasts have told
me that they have stood on the shore of the river and looked across at
the plant in the gold flower-pot and seen hundreds of flowers, of all
sorts and sizes, blossom upon it in quick succession.  It is said that
if one picks the flowers while they are in bloom they will remain
perfect for a long time, but if they are not picked they soon disappear
and are replaced by other flowers.  That, in my opinion, make the Magic
Plant the most wonderful in existence."

"But these are only stories," said the girl.  "Has any of your friends
ever picked a flower from the wonderful plant?"

"No," admitted the Cowardly Lion, "for if any living thing ventures
upon the Magic Isle, where the golden flower-pot stands, that man or
beast takes root in the soil and cannot get away again."

"What happens to them, then?" asked Dorothy.

"They grow smaller, hour by hour and day by day, and finally disappear
entirely."

"Then," said the girl anxiously, "we must hurry up, or Cap'n Bill an'
Trot will get too small to be comf'table."

They were proceeding at a rapid pace during this conversation, for the
Hungry Tiger and the Cowardly Lion were obliged to move swiftly in
order to keep pace with the Glass Cat.  After leaving the Forest of
Gugu they crossed a mountain range, and then a broad plain, after which
they reached another forest, much smaller than that where Gugu ruled.

"The Magic Isle is in this forest," said the Glass Cat, "but the river
is at the other side of the forest.  There is no path through the
trees, but if we keep going east, we will find the river, and then it
will be easy to find the Magic Isle."

"Have you ever traveled this way before?" inquired the Wizard.

"Not exactly," admitted the Cat, "but I know we shall reach the river
if we go east through the forest."

"Lead on, then," said the Wizard.

The Glass Cat started away, and at first it was easy to pass between
the trees; but before long the underbrush and vines became thick and
tangled, and after pushing their way through these obstacles for a
time, our travelers came to a place where even the Glass Cat could not
push through.

"We'd better go back and find a path," suggested the Hungry Tiger.

"I'm s'prised at you," said Dorothy, eyeing the Glass Cat severely.

"I'm surprised, myself," replied the Cat.  "But it's a long way around
the forest to where the river enters it, and I thought we could save
time by going straight through."

"No one can blame you," said the Wizard, "and I think, instead of
turning back, I can make a path that will allow us to proceed."

He opened his black bag and after searching among his magic tools drew
out a small axe, made of some metal so highly polished that it
glittered brightly even in the dark forest.  The Wizard laid the little
axe on the ground and said in a commanding voice:

  "Chop, Little Axe, chop clean and true;
  A path for our feet you must quickly hew.
  Chop till this tangle of jungle is passed;
  Chop to the east, Little Axe--chop fast!"


Then the little axe began to move and flashed its bright blade right
and left, clearing a way through vine and brush and scattering the
tangled barrier so quickly that the Lion and the Tiger, carrying
Dorothy and the Wizard and the cage of monkeys on their backs, were
able to stride through the forest at a fast walk.  The brush seemed to
melt away before them and the little axe chopped so fast that their
eyes only saw a twinkling of the blade.  Then, suddenly, the forest was
open again, and the little axe, having obeyed its orders, lay still
upon the ground.

The Wizard picked up the magic axe and after carefully wiping it with
his silk handkerchief put it away in his black bag.  Then they went on
and in a short time reached the river.

"Let me see," said the Glass Cat, looking up and down the stream, "I
think we are below the Magic Isle; so we must go up the stream until we
come to it."

So up the stream they traveled, walking comfortably on the river bank,
and after a while the water broadened and a sharp bend appeared in the
river, hiding all below from their view.  They walked briskly along,
however, and had nearly reached the bend when a voice cried warningly:
"Look out!"

The travelers halted abruptly and the Wizard said: "Look out for what?"

"You almost stepped on my Diamond Palace," replied the voice, and a
duck with gorgeously colored feathers appeared before them.  "Beasts
and men are terribly clumsy," continued the Duck in an irritated tone,
"and you've no business on this side of the River, anyway.  What are
you doing here?"

"We've come to rescue some friends of ours who are stuck fast on the
Magic Isle in this river," explained Dorothy.

"I know 'em," said the Duck.  "I've been to see 'em, and they're stuck
fast, all right.  You may as well go back home, for no power can save
them."

"This is the Wonderful Wizard of Oz," said Dorothy, pointing to the
little man.

"Well, I'm the Lonesome Duck," was the reply, as the fowl strutted up
and down to show its feathers to best advantage.  "I'm the great Forest
Magician, as any beast can tell you, but even I have no power to
destroy the dreadful charm of the Magic Isle."

"Are you lonesome because you're a magician?" inquired Dorothy.

"No; I'm lonesome because I have no family and no friends.  But I like
to be lonesome, so please don't offer to be friendly with me.  Go away,
and try not to step on my Diamond Palace."

"Where is it?" asked the girl.

"Behind this bush."

Dorothy hopped off the lion's back and ran around the bush to see the
Diamond Palace of the Lonesome Duck, although the gaudy fowl protested
in a series of low quacks.  The girl found, indeed, a glistening dome
formed of clearest diamonds, neatly cemented together, with a doorway
at the side just big enough to admit the duck.

"Where did you find so many diamonds?" asked Dorothy, wonderingly.

"I know a place in the mountains where they are thick as pebbles," said
the Lonesome Duck, "and I brought them here in my bill, one by one and
put them in the river and let the water run over them until they were
brightly polished.  Then I built this palace, and I'm positive it's the
only Diamond Palace in all the world."

"It's the only one I know of," said the little girl; "but if you live
in it all alone, I don't see why it's any better than a wooden palace,
or one of bricks or cobble-stones."

"You're not supposed to understand that," retorted the Lonesome Duck.
"But I might tell you, as a matter of education, that a home of any
sort should be beautiful to those who live in it, and should not be
intended to please strangers.  The Diamond Palace is my home, and I
like it.  So I don't care a quack whether YOU like it or not."

"Oh, but I do!" exclaimed Dorothy.  "It's lovely on the outside, but--"
Then she stopped speaking, for the Lonesome Duck had entered his palace
through the little door without even saying good-bye.  So Dorothy
returned to her friends and they resumed their journey.

"Do you think, Wizard, the Duck was right in saying no magic can rescue
Trot and Cap'n Bill?" asked the girl in a worried tone of voice.

"No, I don't think the Lonesome Duck was right in saying that,"
answered the Wizard, gravely, "but it is possible that their
enchantment will be harder to overcome than I expected.  I'll do my
best, of course, and no one can do more than his best."

That didn't entirely relieve Dorothy's anxiety, but she said nothing
more, and soon, on turning the bend in the river, they came in sight of
the Magic Isle.

"There they are!" exclaimed Dorothy eagerly.

"Yes, I see them," replied the Wizard, nodding.  "They are sitting on
two big toadstools."

"That's queer," remarked the Glass Cat.  "There were no toadstools
there when I left them."

"What a lovely flower!" cried Dorothy in rapture, as her gaze fell on
the Magic Plant.

"Never mind the Flower, just now," advised the Wizard.  "The most
important thing is to rescue our friends."

By this time they had arrived at a place just opposite the Magic Isle,
and now both Trot and Cap'n Bill saw the arrival of their friends and
called to them for help.

"How are you?" shouted the Wizard, putting his hands to his mouth so
they could hear him better across the water.

"We're in hard luck," shouted Cap'n Bill, in reply.  "We're anchored
here and can't move till you find a way to cut the hawser."

"What does he mean by that?" asked Dorothy.

"We can't move our feet a bit!" called Trot, speaking as loud as she
could.

"Why not?" inquired Dorothy.

"They've got roots on 'em," explained Trot.

It was hard to talk from so great a distance, so the Wizard said to the
Glass Cat:

"Go to the island and tell our friends to be patient, for we have come
to save them.  It may take a little time to release them, for the Magic
of the Isle is new to me and I shall have to experiment.  But tell them
I'll hurry as fast as I can."

So the Glass Cat walked across the river under the water to tell Trot
and Cap'n Bill not to worry, and the Wizard at once opened his black
bag and began to make his preparations.




18.  The Magic of the Wizard


He first set up a small silver tripod and placed a gold basin at the
top of it.  Into this basin he put two powders--a pink one and a
sky-blue one--and poured over them a yellow liquid from a crystal vial.
Then he mumbled some magic words, and the powders began to sizzle and
burn and send out a cloud of violet smoke that floated across the river
and completely enveloped both Trot and Cap'n Bill, as well as the
toadstools on which they sat, and even the Magic Plant in the gold
flower-pot.  Then, after the smoke had disappeared into air, the Wizard
called out to the prisoners:

"Are you free?"

Both Trot and Cap'n Bill tried to move their feet and failed.

"No!" they shouted in answer.

The Wizard rubbed his bald head thoughtfully and then took some other
magic tools from the bag.

First he placed a little black ball in a silver pistol and shot it
toward the Magic Isle.  The ball exploded just over the head of Trot
and scattered a thousand sparks over the little girl.

"Oh!" said the Wizard, "I guess that will set her free."

But Trot's feet were still rooted in the ground of the Magic Isle, and
the disappointed Wizard had to try something else.

For almost an hour he worked hard, using almost every magic tool in his
black bag, and still Cap'n Bill and Trot were not rescued.

"Dear me!" exclaimed Dorothy, "I'm 'fraid we'll have to go to Glinda,
after all."

That made the little Wizard blush, for it shamed him to think that his
magic was not equal to that of the Magic Isle.

"I won't give up yet, Dorothy," he said, "for I know a lot of wizardry
that I haven't yet tried.  I don't know what magician enchanted this
little island, or what his powers were, but I DO know that I can break
any enchantment known to the ordinary witches and magicians that used
to inhabit the Land of Oz.  It's like unlocking a door; all you need is
to find the right key."

"But 'spose you haven't the right key with you." suggested Dorothy;
"what then?"

"Then we'll have to make the key," he answered.

The Glass Cat now came back to their side of the river, walking under
the water, and said to the Wizard: "They're getting frightened over
there on the island because they're both growing smaller every minute.
Just now, when I left them, both Trot and Cap'n Bill were only about
half their natural sizes."

"I think," said the Wizard reflectively, "that I'd better go to the
shore of the island, where I can talk to them and work to better
advantage.  How did Trot and Cap'n Bill get to the island?"

"On a raft," answered the Glass Cat.  "It's over there now on the
beach."

"I suppose you're not strong enough to bring the raft to this side, are
you?"

"No; I couldn't move it an inch," said the Cat.

"I'll try to get it for you," volunteered the Cowardly Lion.  "I'm
dreadfully scared for fear the Magic Isle will capture me, too; but
I'll try to get the raft and bring it to this side for you."

"Thank you, my friend," said the Wizard.

So the Lion plunged into the river and swam with powerful strokes
across to where the raft was beached upon the island.  Placing one paw
on the raft, he turned and struck out with his other three legs and so
strong was the great beast that he managed to drag the raft from off
the beach and propel it slowly to where the Wizard stood on the river
bank.

"Good!" exclaimed the little man, well pleased.

"May I go across with you?" asked Dorothy.

The Wizard hesitated.

"If you'll take care not to leave the raft or step foot on the island,
you'll be quite safe," he decided.  So the Wizard told the Hungry Tiger
and the Cowardly Lion to guard the cage of monkeys until he returned,
and then he and Dorothy got upon the raft.  The paddle which Cap'n Bill
had made was still there, so the little Wizard paddled the clumsy raft
across the water and ran it upon the beach of the Magic Isle as close
to the place where Cap'n Bill and Trot were rooted as he could.

Dorothy was shocked to see how small the prisoners had become, and Trot
said to her friends: "If you can't save us soon, there'll be nothing
left of us."

"Be patient, my dear," counseled the Wizard, and took the little axe
from his black bag.

"What are you going to do with that?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"It's a magic axe," replied the Wizard, "and when I tell it to chop, it
will chop those roots from your feet and you can run to the raft before
they grow again."

"Don't!" shouted the sailor in alarm.  "Don't do it!  Those roots are
all flesh roots, and our bodies are feeding 'em while they're growing
into the ground."

"To cut off the roots," said Trot, "would be like cutting off our
fingers and toes."

The Wizard put the little axe back in the black bag and took out a pair
of silver pincers.

"Grow--grow--grow!" he said to the pincers, and at once they grew and
extended until they reached from the raft to the prisoners.

"What are you going to do now?" demanded Cap'n Bill, fearfully eyeing
the pincers.

"This magic tool will pull you up, roots and all, and land you on this
raft," declared the Wizard.

"Don't do it!" pleaded the sailor, with a shudder.  "It would hurt us
awfully."

"It would be just like pulling teeth to pull us up by the roots,"
explained Trot.

"Grow small!" said the Wizard to the pincers, and at once they became
small and he threw them into the black bag.

"I guess, friends, it's all up with us, this time," remarked Cap'n
Bill, with a dismal sigh.

"Please tell Ozma, Dorothy," said Trot, "that we got into trouble
trying to get her a nice birthday present.  Then she'll forgive us.
The Magic Flower is lovely and wonderful, but it's just a lure to catch
folks on this dreadful island and then destroy them.  You'll have a
nice birthday party, without us, I'm sure; and I hope, Dorothy, that
none of you in the Emerald City will forget me--or dear ol' Cap'n Bill."




19.  Dorothy and the Bumble Bees


Dorothy was greatly distressed and had hard work to keep the tears from
her eyes.

"Is that all you can do, Wizard?" she asked the little man.

"It's all I can think of just now," he replied sadly.  "But I intend to
keep on thinking as long--as long--well, as long as thinking will do
any good."

They were all silent for a time, Dorothy and the Wizard sitting
thoughtfully on the raft, and Trot and Cap'n Bill sitting thoughtfully
on the toadstools and growing gradually smaller and smaller in size.

Suddenly Dorothy said: "Wizard, I've thought of something!"

"What have you thought of?" he asked, looking at the little girl with
interest.

"Can you remember the Magic Word that transforms people?" she asked.

"Of course," said he.

"Then you can transform Trot and Cap'n Bill into birds or bumblebees,
and they can fly away to the other shore.  When they're there, you can
transform 'em into their reg'lar shapes again!"

"Can you do that, Wizard?" asked Cap'n Bill, eagerly.

"I think so."

"Roots an' all?" inquired Trot.

"Why, the roots are now a part of you, and if you were transformed to a
bumblebee the whole of you would be transformed, of course, and you'd
be free of this awful island."

"All right; do it!" cried the sailor-man.

So the Wizard said slowly and distinctly:

"I want Trot and Cap'n Bill to become bumblebees--Pyrzqxgl!"

Fortunately, he pronounced the Magic Word in the right way, and
instantly Trot and Cap'n Bill vanished from view, and up from the
places where they had been flew two bumblebees.

"Hooray!" shouted Dorothy in delight; "they're saved!"

"I guess they are," agreed the Wizard, equally delighted.

The bees hovered over the raft an instant and then flew across the
river to where the Lion and the Tiger waited.  The Wizard picked up the
paddle and paddled the raft across as fast as he could.  When it
reached the river bank, both Dorothy and the Wizard leaped ashore and
the little man asked excitedly:

"Where are the bees?"

"The bees?" inquired the Lion, who was half asleep and did not know
what had happened on the Magic Isle.

"Yes; there were two of them."

"Two bees?" said the Hungry Tiger, yawning.  "Why, I ate one of them
and the Cowardly Lion ate the other."

"Goodness gracious!" cried Dorothy horrified.

"It was little enough for our lunch," remarked the Tiger, "but the bees
were the only things we could find."

"How dreadful!" wailed Dorothy, wringing her hands in despair.  "You've
eaten Trot and Cap'n Bill."

But just then she heard a buzzing overhead and two bees alighted on her
shoulder.

"Here we are," said a small voice in her ear.  "I'm Trot, Dorothy."

"And I'm Cap'n Bill," said the other bee.

Dorothy almost fainted, with relief, and the Wizard, who was close by
and had heard the tiny voices, gave a laugh and said:

"You are not the only two bees in the forest, it seems, but I advise
you to keep away from the Lion and the Tiger until you regain your
proper forms."

"Do it now, Wizard!" advised Dorothy.  "They're so small that you never
can tell what might happen to 'em."

So the Wizard gave the command and pronounced the Magic Word, and in
the instant Trot and Cap'n Bill stood beside them as natural as before
they had met their fearful adventure.  For they were no longer small in
size, because the Wizard had transformed them from bumblebees into the
shapes and sizes that nature had formerly given them.  The ugly roots
on their feet had disappeared with the transformation.

While Dorothy was hugging Trot, and Trot was softly crying because she
was so happy, the Wizard shook hands with Cap'n Bill and congratulated
him on his escape.  The old sailor-man was so pleased that he also
shook the Lion's paw and took off his hat and bowed politely to the
cage of monkeys.

Then Cap'n Bill did a curious thing.  He went to a big tree and, taking
out his knife, cut away a big, broad piece of thick bark.  Then he sat
down on the ground and after taking a roll of stout cord from his
pocket--which seemed to be full of all sorts of things--he proceeded to
bind the flat piece of bark to the bottom of his good foot, over the
leather sole.

"What's that for?" inquired the Wizard.

"I hate to be stumped," replied the sailor-man; "so I'm goin' back to
that island."

"And get enchanted again?" exclaimed Trot, with evident disapproval.

"No; this time I'll dodge the magic of the island.  I noticed that my
wooden leg didn't get stuck, or take root, an' neither did the glass
feet of the Glass Cat.  It's only a thing that's made of meat--like man
an' beasts--that the magic can hold an' root to the ground.  Our shoes
are leather, an' leather comes from a beast's hide.  Our stockin's are
wool, an' wool comes from a sheep's back.  So, when we walked on the
Magic Isle, our feet took root there an' held us fast.  But not my
wooden leg.  So now I'll put a wooden bottom on my other foot an' the
magic can't stop me."

"But why do you wish to go back to the island?" asked Dorothy.

"Didn't you see the Magic Flower in the gold flower-pot?" returned
Cap'n Bill.

"Of course I saw it, and it's lovely and wonderful."

"Well, Trot an' I set out to get the magic plant for a present to Ozma
on her birthday, and I mean to get it an' take it back with us to the
Emerald City."

"That would be fine," cried Trot eagerly, "if you think you can do it,
and it would be safe to try!"

"I'm pretty sure it is safe, the way I've fixed my foot," said the
sailor, "an' if I SHOULD happen to get caught, I s'pose the Wizard
could save me again."

"I suppose I could," agreed the Wizard.  "Anyhow, if you wish to try
it, Cap'n Bill, go ahead and we'll stand by and watch what happens."

So the sailor-man got upon the raft again and paddled over to the Magic
Isle, landing as close to the golden flower-pot as he could.  They
watched him walk across the land, put both arms around the flower-pot
and lift it easily from its place.  Then he carried it to the raft and
set it down very gently.  The removal did not seem to affect the Magic
Flower in any way, for it was growing daffodils when Cap'n Bill picked
it up and on the way to the raft it grew tulips and gladioli.  During
the time the sailor was paddling across the river to where his friends
awaited him, seven different varieties of flowers bloomed in succession
on the plant.

"I guess the Magician who put it on the island never thought that any
one would carry it off," said Dorothy.

"He figured that only men would want the plant, and any man who went
upon the island to get it would be caught by the enchantment," added
the Wizard.

"After this," remarked Trot, "no one will care to go on the island, so
it won't be a trap any more."

"There," exclaimed Cap'n Bill, setting down the Magic Plant in triumph
upon the river bank, "if Ozma gets a better birthday present than that,
I'd like to know what it can be!"

"It'll s'prise her, all right," declared Dorothy, standing in awed
wonder before the gorgeous blossoms and watching them change from
yellow roses to violets.

"It'll s'prise ev'rybody in the Em'rald City," Trot asserted in glee,
"and it'll be Ozma's present from Cap'n Bill and me."

"I think I ought to have a little credit," objected the Glass Cat.  "I
discovered the thing, and led you to it, and brought the Wizard here to
save you when you got caught."

"That's true," admitted Trot, "and I'll tell Ozma the whole story, so
she'll know how good you've been."




20.  The Monkeys Have Trouble


"Now," said the Wizard, "we must start for home.  But how are we going
to carry that big gold flower-pot?  Cap'n Bill can't lug it all the
way, that's certain."

"No," acknowledged the sailor-man; "it's pretty heavy.  I could carry
it for a little while, but I'd have to stop to rest every few minutes."

"Couldn't we put it on your back?" Dorothy asked the Cowardly Lion,
with a good-natured yawn.

"I don't object to carrying it, if you can fasten it on," answered the
Lion.

"If it falls off," said Trot, "it might get smashed an' be ruined."

"I'll fix it," promised Cap'n Bill.  "I'll make a flat board out of one
of these tree trunks, an' tie the board on the lion's back, an' set the
flower-pot on the board."  He set to work at once to do this, but as he
only had his big knife for a tool his progress was slow.

So the Wizard took from his black bag a tiny saw that shone like silver
and said to it:

  "Saw, Little Saw, come show your power;
  Make us a board for the Magic Flower."


And at once the Little Saw began to move and it sawed the log so fast
that those who watched it work were astonished.  It seemed to
understand, too, just what the board was to be used for, for when it
was completed it was flat on top and hollowed beneath in such a manner
that it exactly fitted the Lion's back.

"That beats whittlin'!" exclaimed Cap'n Bill, admiringly.  "You don't
happen to have TWO o' them saws; do you, Wizard?"

"No," replied the Wizard, wiping the Magic Saw carefully with his silk
handkerchief and putting it back in the black bag.  "It's the only saw
of its kind in the world; and if there were more like it, it wouldn't
be so wonderful."

They now tied the board on the Lion's back, flat side up, and Cap'n
Bill carefully placed the Magic Flower on the board.

"For fear o' accidents," he said, "I'll walk beside the Lion and hold
onto the flower-pot."

Trot and Dorothy could both ride on the back of the Hungry Tiger, and
between them they carried the cage of monkeys.  But this arrangement
left the Wizard, as well as the sailor, to make the journey on foot,
and so the procession moved slowly and the Glass Cat grumbled because
it would take so long to get to the Emerald City.

The Cat was sour-tempered and grumpy, at first, but before they had
journeyed far, the crystal creature had discovered a fine amusement.
The long tails of the monkeys were constantly sticking through the bars
of their cage, and when they did, the Glass Cat would slyly seize the
tails in her paws and pull them.  That made the monkeys scream, and
their screams pleased the Glass Cat immensely.  Trot and Dorothy tried
to stop this naughty amusement, but when they were not looking the Cat
would pull the tails again, and the creature was so sly and quick that
the monkeys could seldom escape.  They scolded the Cat angrily and
shook the bars of their cage, but they could not get out and the Cat
only laughed at them.

After the party had left the forest and were on the plains of the
Munchkin Country, it grew dark, and they were obliged to make camp for
the night, choosing a pretty place beside a brook.  By means of his
magic the Wizard created three tents, pitched in a row on the grass and
nicely fitted with all that was needful for the comfort of his
comrades.  The middle tent was for Dorothy and Trot, and had in it two
cosy white beds and two chairs.  Another tent, also with beds and
chairs, was for the Wizard and Cap'n Bill, while the third tent was for
the Hungry Tiger, the Cowardly Lion, the cage of Monkeys and the Glass
Cat.  Outside the tents the Wizard made a fire and placed over it a
magic kettle from which he presently drew all sorts of nice things for
their supper, smoking hot.

After they had eaten and talked together for a while under the
twinkling stars, they all went to bed and the people were soon asleep.
The Lion and the Tiger had almost fallen asleep, too, when they were
roused by the screams of the monkeys, for the Glass Cat was pulling
their tails again.  Annoyed by the uproar, the Hungry Tiger cried:
"Stop that racket!" and getting sight of the Glass Cat, he raised his
big paw and struck at the creature.  The cat was quick enough to dodge
the blow, but the claws of the Hungry Tiger scraped the monkey's cage
and bent two of the bars.

Then the Tiger lay down again to sleep, but the monkeys soon discovered
that the bending of the bars would allow them to squeeze through.  They
did not leave the cage, however, but after whispering together they let
their tails stick out and all remained quiet.  Presently the Glass Cat
stole near the cage again and gave a yank to one of the tails.
Instantly the monkeys leaped through the bars, one after another, and
although they were so small the entire dozen of them surrounded the
Glass Cat and clung to her claws and tail and ears and made her a
prisoner.  Then they forced her out of the tent and down to the banks
of the stream.  The monkeys had noticed that these banks were covered
with thick, slimy mud of a dark blue color, and when they had taken the
Cat to the stream, they smeared this mud all over the glass body of the
cat, filling the creature's ears and eyes with it, so that she could
neither see nor hear.  She was no longer transparent and so thick was
the mud upon her that no one could see her pink brains or her ruby
heart.

In this condition they led the pussy back to the tent and then got
inside their cage again.

By morning the mud had dried hard on the Glass Cat and it was a dull
blue color throughout.  Dorothy and Trot were horrified, but the Wizard
shook his head and said it served the Glass Cat right for teasing the
monkeys.

Cap'n Bill, with his strong hands, soon bent the golden wires of the
monkeys' cage into the proper position and then he asked the Wizard if
he should wash the Glass Cat in the water of the brook.

"Not just yet," answered the Wizard.  "The Cat deserves to be punished,
so I think I'll leave that blue mud--which is as bad as paint--upon her
body until she gets to the Emerald City.  The silly creature is so vain
that she will be greatly shamed when the Oz people see her in this
condition, and perhaps she'll take the lesson to heart and leave the
monkeys alone hereafter."

However, the Glass Cat could not see or hear, and to avoid carrying her
on the journey the Wizard picked the mud out of her eyes and ears and
Dorothy dampened her handkerchief and washed both the eyes and ears
clean.

As soon as she could speak the Glass Cat asked indignantly: "Aren't you
going to punish those monkeys for playing such a trick on me?"

"No," answered the Wizard.  "You played a trick on them by pulling
their tails, so this is only tit-for-tat, and I'm glad the monkeys had
their revenge."

He wouldn't allow the Glass Cat to go near the water, to wash herself,
but made her follow them when they resumed their journey toward the
Emerald City.

"This is only part of your punishment," said the Wizard, severely.
"Ozma will laugh at you, when we get to her palace, and so will the
Scarecrow, and the Tin Woodman, and Tik-Tok, and the Shaggy Man, and
Button-Bright, and the Patchwork Girl, and--"

"And the Pink Kitten," added Dorothy.

That suggestion hurt the Glass Cat more than anything else.  The Pink
Kitten always quarreled with the Glass Cat and insisted that flesh was
superior to glass, while the Glass Cat would jeer at the Pink Kitten,
because it had no pink brains.  But the pink brains were all daubed
with blue mud, just now, and if the Pink Kitten should see the Glass
Cat in such a condition, it would be dreadfully humiliating.

For several hours the Glass Cat walked along very meekly, but toward
noon it seized an opportunity when no one was looking and darted away
through the long grass.  It remembered that there was a tiny lake of
pure water near by, and to this lake the Cat sped as fast as it could
go.

The others never missed her until they stopped for lunch, and then it
was too late to hunt for her.

"I s'pect she's gone somewhere to clean herself," said Dorothy.

"Never mind," replied the Wizard.  "Perhaps this glass creature has
been punished enough, and we must not forget she saved both Trot and
Cap'n Bill."

"After first leading 'em onto an enchanted island," added Dorothy.
"But I think, as you do, that the Glass Cat is punished enough, and
p'raps she won't try to pull the monkeys' tails again."

The Glass Cat did not rejoin the party of travelers.  She was still
resentful, and they moved too slowly to suit her, besides.  When they
arrived at the Royal Palace, one of the first things they saw was the
Glass Cat curled up on a bench as bright and clean and transparent as
ever.  But she pretended not to notice them, and they passed her by
without remark.




21.  The College of Athletic Arts


Dorothy and her friends arrived at the Royal Palace at an opportune
time, for Ozma was holding high court in her Throne Room, where
Professor H. M. Wogglebug, T.E., was appealing to her to punish some of
the students of the Royal Athletic College, of which he was the
Principal.

This College is located in the Munchkin Country, but not far from the
Emerald City.  To enable the students to devote their entire time to
athletic exercises, such as boating, foot-ball, and the like, Professor
Wogglebug had invented an assortment of Tablets of Learning.  One of
these tablets, eaten by a scholar after breakfast, would instantly
enable him to understand arithmetic or algebra or any other branch of
mathematics.  Another tablet eaten after lunch gave a student a
complete knowledge of geography.  Another tablet made it possible for
the eater to spell the most difficult words, and still another enabled
him to write a beautiful hand.  There were tablets for history,
mechanics, home cooking and agriculture, and it mattered not whether a
boy or a girl was stupid or bright, for the tablets taught them
everything in the twinkling of an eye.

This method, which is patented in the Land of Oz by Professor
Wogglebug, saves paper and books, as well as the tedious hours devoted
to study in some of our less favored schools, and it also allows the
students to devote all their time to racing, base-ball, tennis and
other manly and womanly sports, which are greatly interfered with by
study in those Temples of Learning where Tablets of Learning are
unknown.

But it so happened that Professor Wogglebug (who had invented so much
that he had acquired the habit) carelessly invented a Square-Meal
Tablet, which was no bigger than your little finger-nail but contained,
in condensed form, the equal of a bowl of soup, a portion of fried
fish, a roast, a salad and a dessert, all of which gave the same
nourishment as a square meal.

The Professor was so proud of these Square-Meal Tablets that he began
to feed them to the students at his college, instead of other food, but
the boys and girls objected because they wanted food that they could
enjoy the taste of.  It was no fun at all to swallow a tablet, with a
glass of water, and call it a dinner; so they refused to eat the
Square-Meal Tablets.  Professor Wogglebug insisted, and the result was
that the Senior Class seized the learned Professor one day and threw
him into the river--clothes and all.  Everyone knows that a wogglebug
cannot swim, and so the inventor of the wonderful Square-Meal Tablets
lay helpless on the bottom of the river for three days before a
fisherman caught one of his legs on a fishhook and dragged him out upon
the bank.

The learned Professor was naturally indignant at such treatment, and so
he brought the entire Senior Class to the Emerald City and appealed to
Ozma of Oz to punish them for their rebellion.

I do not suppose the girl Ruler was very severe with the rebellious
boys and girls, because she had herself refused to eat the Square-Meal
Tablets in place of food, but while she was listening to the
interesting case in her Throne Room, Cap'n Bill managed to carry the
golden flower-pot containing the Magic Flower up to Trot's room without
it being seen by anyone except Jellia Jamb, Ozma's chief Maid of Honor,
and Jellia promised not to tell.

Also the Wizard was able to carry the cage of monkeys up to one of the
top towers of the palace, where he had a room of his own, to which no
one came unless invited.  So Trot and Dorothy and Cap'n Bill and the
Wizard were all delighted at the successful end of their adventure.
The Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger went to the marble stables
behind the Royal Palace, where they lived while at home, and they too
kept the secret, even refusing to tell the Wooden Sawhorse, and Hank
the Mule, and the Yellow Hen, and the Pink Kitten where they had been.

Trot watered the Magic Flower every day and allowed no one in her room
to see the beautiful blossoms except her friends, Betsy Bobbin and
Dorothy.  The wonderful plant did not seem to lose any of its magic by
being removed from its island, and Trot was sure that Ozma would prize
it as one of her most delightful treasures.

Up in his tower the little Wizard of Oz began training his twelve tiny
monkeys, and the little creatures were so intelligent that they learned
every trick the Wizard tried to teach them.  The Wizard treated them
with great kindness and gentleness and gave them the food that monkeys
love best, so they promised to do their best on the great occasion of
Ozma's birthday.




22.  Ozma's Birthday Party


It seems odd that a fairy should have a birthday, for fairies, they
say, were born at the beginning of time and live forever.  Yet, on the
other hand, it would be a shame to deprive a fairy, who has so many
other good things, of the delights of a birthday.  So we need not
wonder that the fairies keep their birthdays just as other folks do,
and consider them occasions for feasting and rejoicing.

Ozma, the beautiful girl Ruler of the Fairyland of Oz, was a real
fairy, and so sweet and gentle in caring for her people that she was
greatly beloved by them all.  She lived in the most magnificent palace
in the most magnificent city in the world, but that did not prevent her
from being the friend of the most humble person in her dominions.  She
would mount her Wooden Sawhorse, and ride out to a farm house and sit
in the kitchen to talk with the good wife of the farmer while she did
her family baking; or she would play with the children and give them
rides on her famous wooden steed; or she would stop in a forest to
speak to a charcoal burner and ask if he was happy or desired anything
to make him more content; or she would teach young girls how to sew and
plan pretty dresses, or enter the shops where the jewelers and
craftsmen were busy and watch them at their work, giving to each and
all a cheering word or sunny smile.

And then Ozma would sit in her jeweled throne, with her chosen
courtiers all about her, and listen patiently to any complaint brought
to her by her subjects, striving to accord equal justice to all.
Knowing she was fair in her decisions, the Oz people never murmured at
her judgments, but agreed, if Ozma decided against them, she was right
and they wrong.

When Dorothy and Trot and Betsy Bobbin and Ozma were together, one
would think they were all about of an age, and the fairy Ruler no older
and no more "grown up" than the other three.  She would laugh and romp
with them in regular girlish fashion, yet there was an air of quiet
dignity about Ozma, even in her merriest moods, that, in a manner,
distinguished her from the others.  The three girls loved her
devotedly, but they were never able to quite forget that Ozma was the
Royal Ruler of the wonderful Fairyland of Oz, and by birth belonged to
a powerful race.

Ozma's palace stood in the center of a delightful and extensive garden,
where splendid trees and flowering shrubs and statuary and fountains
abounded.  One could walk for hours in this fascinating park and see
something interesting at every step.  In one place was an aquarium,
where strange and beautiful fish swam; at another spot all the birds of
the air gathered daily to a great feast which Ozma's servants provided
for them, and were so fearless of harm that they would alight upon
one's shoulders and eat from one's hand.  There was also the Fountain
of the Water of Oblivion, but it was dangerous to drink of this water,
because it made one forget everything he had ever before known, even to
his own name, and therefore Ozma had placed a sign of warning upon the
fountain.  But there were also fountains that were delightfully
perfumed, and fountains of delicious nectar, cool and richly flavored,
where all were welcome to refresh themselves.

Around the palace grounds was a great wall, thickly encrusted with
glittering emeralds, but the gates stood open and no one was forbidden
entrance.  On holidays the people of the Emerald City often took their
children to see the wonders of Ozma's gardens, and even entered the
Royal Palace, if they felt so inclined, for they knew that they and
their Ruler were friends, and that Ozma delighted to give them pleasure.

When all this is considered, you will not be surprised that the people
throughout the Land of Oz, as well as Ozma's most intimate friends and
her royal courtiers, were eager to celebrate her birthday, and made
preparations for the festival weeks in advance.  All the brass bands
practiced their nicest tunes, for they were to march in the numerous
processions to be made in the Winkie Country, the Gillikin Country, the
Munchkin Country and the Quadling Country, as well as in the Emerald
City.  Not all the people could go to congratulate their Ruler, but all
could celebrate her birthday, in one way or another, however far
distant from her palace they might be.  Every home and building
throughout the Land of Oz was to be decorated with banners and bunting,
and there were to be games, and plays, and a general good time for
every one.

It was Ozma's custom on her birthday to give a grand feast at the
palace, to which all her closest friends were invited.  It was a
queerly assorted company, indeed, for there are more quaint and unusual
characters in Oz than in all the rest of the world, and Ozma was more
interested in unusual people than in ordinary ones--just as you and I
are.

On this especial birthday of the lovely girl Ruler, a long table was
set in the royal Banquet Hall of the palace, at which were place-cards
for the invited guests, and at one end of the great room was a smaller
table, not so high, for Ozma's animal friends, whom she never forgot,
and at the other end was a big table where all of the birthday gifts
were to be arranged.

When the guests arrived, they placed their gifts on this table and then
found their places at the banquet table.  And, after the guests were
all placed, the animals entered in a solemn procession and were placed
at their table by Jellia Jamb.  Then, while an orchestra hidden by a
bank of roses and ferns played a march composed for the occasion, the
Royal Ozma entered the Banquet Hall, attended by her Maids of Honor,
and took her seat at the head of the table.

She was greeted by a cheer from all the assembled company, the animals
adding their roars and growls and barks and mewing and cackling to
swell the glad tumult, and then all seated themselves at their tables.

At Ozma's right sat the famous Scarecrow of Oz, whose straw-stuffed
body was not beautiful, but whose happy nature and shrewd wit had made
him a general favorite.  On the left of the Ruler was placed the Tin
Woodman, whose metal body had been brightly polished for this event.
The Tin Woodman was the Emperor of the Winkie Country and one of the
most important persons in Oz.

Next to the Scarecrow, Dorothy was seated, and next to her was Tik-Tok,
the Clockwork Man, who had been wound up as tightly as his clockwork
would permit, so he wouldn't interrupt the festivities by running down.
Then came Aunt Em and Uncle Henry, Dorothy's own relations, two kindly
old people who had a cozy home in the Emerald City and were very happy
and contented there.  Then Betsy Bobbin was seated, and next to her the
droll and delightful Shaggy Man, who was a favorite wherever he went.

On the other side of the table, opposite the Tin Woodman was placed
Trot, and next to her, Cap'n Bill.  Then was seated Button-Bright and
Ojo the Lucky, and Dr. Pipt and his good wife Margalot, and the
astonishing Frogman, who had come from the Yip country to be present at
Ozma's birthday feast.

At the foot of the table, facing Ozma, was seated the queenly Glinda,
the good Sorceress of Oz, for this was really the place of honor next
to the head of the table where Ozma herself sat.  On Glinda's right was
the Little Wizard of Oz, who owed to Glinda all of the magical arts he
knew.  Then came Jinjur, a pretty girl farmer of whom Ozma and Dorothy
were quite fond.  The adjoining seat was occupied by the Tin Soldier,
and next to him was Professor H. M.  Wogglebug, T.E., of the Royal
Athletic College.

On Glinda's left was placed the jolly Patchwork Girl, who was a little
afraid of the Sorceress and so was likely to behave herself pretty
well.  The Shaggy Man's brother was beside the Patchwork Girl, and then
came that interesting personage, Jack Pumpkinhead, who had grown a
splendid big pumpkin for a new head to be worn on Ozma's birthday, and
had carved a face on it that was even jollier in expression than the
one he had last worn.  New heads were not unusual with Jack, for the
pumpkins did not keep long, and when the seeds--which served him as
brains--began to get soft and mushy, he realized his head would soon
spoil, and so he procured a new one from his great field of
pumpkins--grown by him so that he need never lack a head.

You will have noticed that the company at Ozma's banquet table was
somewhat mixed, but every one invited was a tried and trusted friend of
the girl Ruler, and their presence made her quite happy.

No sooner had Ozma seated herself, with her back to the birthday table,
than she noticed that all present were eyeing with curiosity and
pleasure something behind her, for the gorgeous Magic Flower was
blooming gloriously and the mammoth blossoms that quickly succeeded one
another on the plant were beautiful to view and filled the entire room
with their delicate fragrance.  Ozma wanted to look, too, to see what
all were staring at, but she controlled her curiosity because it was
not proper that she should yet view her birthday gifts.

So the sweet and lovely Ruler devoted herself to her guests, several of
whom, such as the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman, the Patchwork Girl,
Tik-Tok, Jack Pumpkinhead and the Tin Soldier, never ate anything but
sat very politely in their places and tried to entertain those of the
guests who did eat.

And, at the animal table, there was another interesting group,
consisting of the Cowardly Lion, the Hungry Tiger, Toto--Dorothy's
little shaggy black dog--Hank the Mule, the Pink Kitten, the Wooden
Sawhorse, the Yellow Hen, and the Glass Cat.  All of these had good
appetites except the Sawhorse and the Glass Cat, and each was given a
plentiful supply of the food it liked best.

Finally, when the banquet was nearly over and the ice-cream was to be
served, four servants entered bearing a huge cake, all frosted and
decorated with candy flowers.  Around the edge of the cake was a row of
lighted candles, and in the center were raised candy letters that
spelled the words:

          OZMA'S
       Birthday Cake
           from
  Dorothy and the Wizard


"Oh, how beautiful!" cried Ozma, greatly delighted, and Dorothy said
eagerly: "Now you must cut the cake, Ozma, and each of us will eat a
piece with our ice-cream."

Jellia Jamb brought a large golden knife with a jeweled handle, and
Ozma stood up in her place and attempted to cut the cake.  But as soon
as the frosting in the center broke under the pressure of the knife
there leaped from the cake a tiny monkey three inches high, and he was
followed by another and another, until twelve monkeys stood on the
tablecloth and bowed low to Ozma.

"Congratulations to our gracious Ruler!" they exclaimed in a chorus,
and then they began a dance, so droll and amusing that all the company
roared with laughter and even Ozma joined in the merriment.  But after
the dance the monkeys performed some wonderful acrobatic feats, and
then they ran to the hollow of the cake and took out some band
instruments of burnished gold--cornets, horns, drums, and the like--and
forming into a procession the monkeys marched up and down the table
playing a jolly tune with the ease of skilled musicians.

Dorothy was delighted with the success of her "Surprise Cake," and
after the monkeys had finished their performance, the banquet came to
an end.

Now was the time for Ozma to see her other presents, so Glinda the Good
rose and, taking the girl Ruler by her hand, led her to the table where
all her gifts were placed in magnificent array.  The Magic Flower of
course attracted her attention first, and Trot had to tell her the
whole story of their adventures in getting it.  The little girl did not
forget to give due credit to the Glass Cat and the little Wizard, but
it was really Cap'n Bill who had bravely carried the golden flower-pot
away from the enchanted Isle.

Ozma thanked them all, and said she would place the Magic Flower in her
boudoir where she might enjoy its beauty and fragrance continually.
But now she discovered the marvelous gown woven by Glinda and her
maidens from strands drawn from pure emeralds, and being a girl who
loved pretty clothes, Ozma's ecstasy at being presented with this
exquisite gown may well be imagined.  She could hardly wait to put it
on, but the table was loaded with other pretty gifts and the night was
far spent before the happy girl Ruler had examined all her presents and
thanked those who had lovingly donated them.




23.  The Fountain of Oblivion


The morning after the birthday fete, as the Wizard and Dorothy were
walking in the grounds of the palace, Ozma came out and joined them,
saying:

"I want to hear more of your adventures in the Forest of Gugu, and how
you were able to get those dear little monkeys to use in Dorothy's
Surprise Cake."

So they sat down on a marble bench near to the Fountain of the Water of
Oblivion, and between them Dorothy and the Wizard related their
adventures.

"I was dreadfully fussy while I was a woolly lamb," said Dorothy, "for
it didn't feel good, a bit.  And I wasn't quite sure, you know, that
I'd ever get to be a girl again."

"You might have been a woolly lamb yet, if I hadn't happened to have
discovered that Magic Transformation Word," declared the Wizard.

"But what became of the walnut and the hickory-nut into which you
transformed those dreadful beast magicians?" inquired Ozma.

"Why, I'd almost forgotten them," was the reply; "but I believe they
are still here in my pocket."

Then he searched in his pockets and brought out the two nuts and showed
them to her.

Ozma regarded them thoughtfully.

"It isn't right to leave any living creatures in such helpless forms,"
said she.  "I think, Wizard, you ought to transform them into their
natural shapes again."

"But I don't know what their natural shapes are," he objected, "for of
course the forms of mixed animals which they had assumed were not
natural to them.  And you must not forget, Ozma, that their natures
were cruel and mischievous, so if I bring them back to life they might
cause us a great deal of trouble."

"Nevertheless," said the Ruler of Oz, "we must free them from their
present enchantments.  When you restore them to their natural forms we
will discover who they really are, and surely we need not fear any two
people, even though they prove to be magicians and our enemies."

"I am not so sure of that," protested the Wizard, with a shake of his
bald head.  "The one bit of magic I robbed them of--which was the Word
of Transformation--is so simple, yet so powerful, that neither Glinda
nor I can equal it.  It isn't all in the word, you know, it's the way
the word is pronounced.  So if the two strange magicians have other
magic of the same sort, they might prove very dangerous to us, if we
liberated them."

"I've an idea!" exclaimed Dorothy.  "I'm no wizard, and no fairy, but
if you do as I say, we needn't fear these people at all."

"What is your thought, my dear?" asked Ozma.

"Well," replied the girl, "here is this Fountain of the Water of
Oblivion, and that's what put the notion into my head.  When the Wizard
speaks that ter'ble word that will change 'em back to their real forms,
he can make 'em dreadful thirsty, too, and we'll put a cup right here
by the fountain, so it'll be handy.  Then they'll drink the water and
forget all the magic they ever knew--and everything else, too."

"That's not a bad idea," said the Wizard, looking at Dorothy
approvingly.

"It's a very GOOD idea," declared Ozma.  "Run for a cup, Dorothy."

So Dorothy ran to get a cup, and while she was gone the Wizard said:

"I don't know whether the real forms of these magicians are those of
men or beasts.  If they're beasts, they would not drink from a cup but
might attack us at once and drink afterward.  So it might be safer for
us to have the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger here to protect us if
necessary."

Ozma drew out a silver whistle which was attached to a slender gold
chain and blew upon the whistle two shrill blasts.  The sound, though
not harsh, was very penetrating, and as soon as it reached the ears of
the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger, the two huge beasts quickly
came bounding toward them.  Ozma explained to them what the Wizard was
about to do, and told them to keep quiet unless danger threatened.  So
the two powerful guardians of the Ruler of Oz crouched beside the
fountain and waited.

Dorothy returned and set the cup on the edge of the fountain.  Then the
Wizard placed the hickory-nut beside the fountain and said in a solemn
voice:

"I want you to resume your natural form, and to be very
thirsty--Pyrzqxgl!"

In an instant there appeared, in the place of the hickory-nut, the form
of Kiki Aru, the Hyup boy.  He seemed bewildered, at first, as if
trying to remember what had happened to him and why he was in this
strange place.  But he was facing the fountain, and the bubbling water
reminded him that he was thirsty.  Without noticing Ozma, the Wizard
and Dorothy, who were behind him, he picked up the cup, filled it with
the Water of Oblivion, and drank it to the last drop.

He was now no longer thirsty, but he felt more bewildered than ever,
for now he could remember nothing at all--not even his name or where he
came from.  He looked around the beautiful garden with a pleased
expression, and then, turning, he beheld Ozma and the Wizard and
Dorothy regarding him curiously and the two great beasts crouching
behind them.

Kiki Aru did not know who they were, but he thought Ozma very lovely
and Dorothy very pleasant.  So he smiled at them--the same innocent,
happy smile that a baby might have indulged in, and that pleased
Dorothy, who seized his hand and led him to a seat beside her on the
bench.

"Why, I thought you were a dreadful magician," she exclaimed, "and
you're only a boy!"

"What is a magician?" he asked, "and what is a boy?"

"Don't you know?" inquired the girl.

Kiki shook his head.  Then he laughed.

"I do not seem to know anything," he replied.

"It's very curious," remarked the Wizard.  "He wears the dress of the
Munchkins, so he must have lived at one time in the Munchkin Country.
Of course the boy can tell us nothing of his history or his family, for
he has forgotten all that he ever knew."

"He seems a nice boy, now that all the wickedness has gone from him,"
said Ozma.  "So we will keep him here with us and teach him our
ways--to be true and considerate of others."

"Why, in that case, it's lucky for him he drank the Water of Oblivion,"
said Dorothy.

"It is indeed," agreed the Wizard.  "But the remarkable thing, to me,
is how such a young boy ever learned the secret of the Magic Word of
Transformation.  Perhaps his companion, who is at present this walnut,
was the real magician, although I seem to remember that it was this boy
in the beast's form who whispered the Magic Word into the hollow tree,
where I overheard it."

"Well, we will soon know who the other is," suggested Ozma.  "He may
prove to be another Munchkin boy."

The Wizard placed the walnut near the fountain and said, as slowly and
solemnly as before:

"I want you to resume your natural form, and to be very
thirsty--Pyrzqxgl!"

Then the walnut disappeared and Ruggedo the Nome stood in its place.
He also was facing the fountain, and he reached for the cup, filled it,
and was about to drink when Dorothy exclaimed:

"Why, it's the old Nome King!"

Ruggedo swung around and faced them, the cup still in his hand.

"Yes," he said in an angry voice, "it's the old Nome King, and I'm
going to conquer all Oz and be revenged on you for kicking me out of my
throne."  He looked around a moment, and then continued: "There isn't
an egg in sight, and I'm stronger than all of you people put together!
I don't know how I came here, but I'm going to fight the fight of my
life--and I'll win!"

His long white hair and beard waved in the breeze; his eyes flashed
hate and vengeance, and so astonished and shocked were they by the
sudden appearance of this old enemy of the Oz people that they could
only stare at him in silence and shrink away from his wild glare.

Ruggedo laughed.  He drank the water, threw the cup on the ground and
said fiercely:

"And now--and now--and--"

His voice grew gentle.  He rubbed his forehead with a puzzled air and
stroked his long beard.

"What was I going to say?" he asked, pleadingly.

"Don't you remember?" said the Wizard.

"No; I've forgotten."

"Who ARE you?" asked Dorothy.

He tried to think.  "I--I'm sure I don't know," he stammered.

"Don't you know who WE are, either?" questioned the girl.

"I haven't the slightest idea," said the Nome.

"Tell us who this Munchkin boy is," suggested Ozma.

Ruggedo looked at the boy and shook his head.

"He's a stranger to me.  You are all strangers.  I--I'm a stranger to
myself," he said.

Then he patted the Lion's head and murmured, "Good doggie!" and the
Lion growled indignantly.

"What shall we do with him?" asked the Wizard, perplexed.

"Once before the wicked old Nome came here to conquer us, and then, as
now, he drank of the Water of Oblivion and became harmless.  But we
sent him back to the Nome Kingdom, where he soon learned the old evil
ways again.

"For that reason," said Ozma, "we must find a place for him in the Land
of Oz, and keep him here.  For here he can learn no evil and will
always be as innocent of guile as our own people."

And so the wandering ex-King of the Nomes found a new home, a peaceful
and happy home, where he was quite content and passed his days in
innocent enjoyment.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Magic of Oz, by L. Frank Baum

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAGIC OF OZ ***

***** This file should be named 419.txt or 419.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/419/

Produced by Dennis Amundson.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
